TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT

          JUNE 2014
                                                                                                        Dear Reader:


                                                                                                        This is a vital and challenging time for all of us. The United States is engaged on
                                                                                                        countless active fronts on every continent across the globe—big, simultaneous
                                                                                                        confrontations and efforts.
                                                                                                        Among those challenges, and one absolutely inextricably linked to the broader
                                                                                                        effort to spread the rule of law and face the crisis of failed and failing states,
                                                                                                        we find perhaps no greater assault on basic freedom than the evil of human
                                                                                                        trafficking. Whether it comes in the form of a young girl trapped in a brothel, a
                                                                                                        woman enslaved as a domestic worker, a boy forced to sell himself on the street,
                                                                                                        or a man abused on a fishing boat, the victims of this crime have been robbed
                                                                                                        of the right to lead the lives they choose for themselves, and trafficking and its
                                                        John F. Kerry
                                          SeCreTAry oF STATe oF The UniTed STATeS oF AmeriCA
                                                                                                        consequences have a spill-over effect that touches every element of a society.
Kerry Official Portrait 8x10 CX1.indd 1                                                        3/25/13 8:09 AM




                 The fight against modern slavery is deeply personal to me. When I was a prosecutor outside of Boston in the
                 1970s, I worked to put criminals behind bars for rape and sexual assault. We were actually one of the very
                 first jurisdictions in America to set up a witness protection program for victims.
                 My time as a prosecutor seared in me a simple lesson: Only when we start focusing on victims as survivors
                 —not just as potential witnesses—can we provide them with a greater measure of justice, and help them find
                 the courage to step forward.
                 Survivors know better than anyone the steps we need to take to identify those enslaved and bring to justice
                 those responsible. When a Cambodian man is lured under false pretenses and subjected to forced labor far
                 from home, he knows better than anyone how we mitigate that risk. When a young Nepalese woman is coerced
                 into a sex industry, she knows better than anyone how to help law enforcement spot future victims of this
                 crime. And when this woman cooperates in the conviction of her trafficker, she knows better than anyone
                 what makes that process less traumatic and our efforts more effective.
                 We each have a responsibility to make this horrific and all-too-common crime a lot less common. And our
                 work with victims is the key that will open the door to real change—not just on behalf of the more than
                 44,000 survivors who have been identified in the past year, but also for the more than 20 million victims of
                 trafficking who have not.
                 As Secretary of State, I’ve seen with my own two eyes countless individual acts of courage and commitment.
                 I’ve seen how victims of this crime can become survivors and how survivors can become voices of conscience
                 and conviction in the cause.
                 This year’s Trafficking in Persons Report offers a roadmap for the road ahead as we confront the scourge of
                 trafficking. Whether a concerned citizen, a board member, a government official, or a survivor of trafficking,
                 we each have a responsibility to spot human trafficking, engage our communities, and commit to take action.
                 I invite you to help us turn the page.


                                                                                                                                            Onwards,




                                                                                                                                            John F. Kerry
                                                                                                                                            Secretary of State
                              Dear Reader:


                              This year’s theme—The Journey from Victim to Survivor—is very personal to me.
                              It brings to mind many of the people I came to know and admire during the
                              years I spent as a civil rights prosecutor.
                              I remember how frightened “Phuong” looked entering the empty courtroom
                              a few days before the trial. To ease the trauma of testifying, she and her fellow
                              survivors took turns sitting in the witness stand, the jury box, and even—
                              with the permission of the court—the judge’s chair. She sat at counsel’s table,
                              questioning one of the agents as if she were the prosecutor. As the hour went
                              by and she became comfortable in the courtroom, her nervousness turned to
                              laughter and then to determination. A week later, leaving the stand after a long
                              cross-examination, she remarked about the defendant: “He looks so small.” The
balance of power had finally shifted. A decade later, he remains in federal prison and his victims are living
their lives in America. I was honored to attend the 10th anniversary celebrating their liberation from the
garment factory; we danced and sang and told stories and laughed with the children. Phuong and her friends
were no longer victims, they were survivors.
Then there was “Katia.” Trying hard to be tough and strong, the former track star who had been held in
servitude in a strip club finally began to open up after she saw a female agent handcuff her trafficker at the
end of a court hearing. While he went to prison, she went to work, building a new life in the United States and
choosing to engage occasionally in anti-trafficking advocacy on her own terms. She bravely testified before
Congress, sharing her story so that others could be helped. When I keynoted a seminar in her new hometown,
Katia and one of her fellow survivors insisted on introducing me. I looked up at the podium and saw that
they were still strong, but no longer scared. Toughness, defensiveness, and wariness had been replaced by
determination, resilience, and grace. We were still linked, not as a prosecutor and victim-witnesses, but as
colleagues.
What trafficking victims endure is incomparable to what most of us confront in a lifetime and should put
into context the small injustices and frustrations of our daily work and lives. The same can be said of their
courage and strength, both during their exploitation and recovery. Of the tens of thousands of victims
identified this year worldwide, some will become advocates, some will go on to achieve personal goals, and
some will continue to need care.
This Report stands for the belief that all survivors should be able to feel their power and live their truth.
Whether becoming a witness or an activist, an employer or employee, the journey from victim to survivor is
one that no one should walk alone. Last year, we challenged governments to ensure trafficking victims have
“the freedom to choose their own futures.” That future is now.




                                                               Sincerely,



                                                               Luis CdeBaca
                                                               Ambassador-at-Large to Monitor and
                                                               Combat Trafficking in Persons
4
    2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Contents




                                                                                              CONTENTS
The Journey from Victim to Survivor		
 Building a Strong Foundation		 7
 Dignity, Security, and Respect		 8
 Access to Justice 		 13
 Clearing the Way		 23
 The Survivor’s Voice: Guiding the Way Forward		 24

Definitions and Methodology		
 What is Trafficking in Persons?		 29
 The Face of Modern Slavery		 29
 Methodology		37
 Tier Placement		 40
 A Guide to the Tiers		 43
 Penalties for Tier 3 Countries		 44


Topics of Special Interest
 The Vulnerability of LGBT Individuals to Human Trafficking		 10
 The Use of Forced Criminality: Victims Hidden Behind a Crime		 14
 Marginalized Communities: Romani Victims of Trafficking		 19
 Human Trafficking and Major Sporting Events		 20
 Promising Practices in the Eradication of Trafficking in Persons		 22
 Making the Problem Worse: Off-Duty Law Enforcement Officers
 Providing Security in High-Risk Establishments		 25
 Reactivating Trauma in Sex Trafficking Testimony		 27
 Media Best Practices		 30
 Human Trafficking and the Demand for Organs		 32
 Victims’ Consent		 35
 Vulnerability of Indigenous Persons to Human Trafficking		 36
 Child Soldiers		 38
 The Intersection between Environmental Degradation and Human Trafficking		 52



Global Law Enforcement Data 		45
2014 TIP Report Heroes		                                                   46
Tier Placements/Maps		                                                     58
How to Read a Country Narrative		                                          66
Country Narratives		                                                       67
Relevant International Conventions		                                       420
TVPA Minimum Standards		                                                   425

Stopping Human Trafficking, Sexual Exploitation, and
Abuse by International Peacekeepers & Civilian Personnel		427
International, Regional, and Sub-Regional Organizations
Combating Trafficking in Persons		428
Glossary of Acronyms		                                                     430
                                                                                 This Report and
Photo Credits		                                                            431
                                                                                 subsequent updates
Closing Note		                                                             432   are available at
                                                                                 www.state.gov/j/tip



                                                                                                5
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                     “As we work to dismantle trafficking networks and help survivors rebuild their
                                         lives, we must also address the underlying forces that push so many into
                                        bondage. We must develop economies that create legitimate jobs, build a
                                     global sense of justice that says no child should ever be exploited, and empower
                                          our daughters and sons with the same chances to pursue their dreams.”
                                                               – President Barack Obama, 2013




          6
The Journey from victim




                                                                                                                              THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
to survivor


I
   n the 14 years the United States has produced the Trafficking in Persons Report, the world has made
   tremendous progress in the fight against human trafficking. There is no government, however, that has
   done a perfect job responding to this crime. In the years ahead, it seems unlikely that any government
will reach perfection. But should that day arrive when human trafficking disappears, one fact will remain
certain: what has happened to the victims of modern slavery can never be undone. For those who have
endured the exploitation of modern slavery, even the most effective justice system and the most innovative
efforts to prevent future trafficking will not reverse the abuse and trauma that millions of trafficking victims
have endured.

With the right support and services, however, victims can move beyond their suffering and forward with
their lives. With the right legal structures and policies, they can see justice done. With the right opportunities,
they can make choices about the lives they want and even use their experiences to help guide and strengthen
efforts to fight this crime. This process is unique for each victim, and each must take steps based on his or
her own strength, agency, and determination.

Governments play a vital role in facilitating this process. While a government institution will never be able
to reverse what has happened to someone abused in a situation of modern slavery, governments can aid an
individual’s recovery by providing support to each victim on his or her journey toward becoming a survivor.

In addition to assessments of what almost every government in the world is doing to combat modern slavery,
this year’s Trafficking in Persons Report takes a hard look at the journey from victim to survivor, making
recommendations and highlighting effective practices that, if implemented, could ease the path forward
for countless survivors around the world.

Building on a Strong Foundation
For governments to properly assist victims, they
                                                            VICTIMS’ STORIES
must broadly and effectively implement a strong,
modern, comprehensive anti-trafficking law. Such            The victims’ testimonies included in this Report are meant
                                                            to be illustrative only and do not reflect all forms of
a law includes criminal provisions treating human
                                                            trafficking that occur. These stories could take place
trafficking as a serious offense with commensurately        anywhere in the world. They illustrate the many forms
serious punishment for offenders and, just as               of trafficking and the wide variety of places in which they
important, victim protection measures that address          occur. Many of the victims’ names have been changed
needs such as immigration status, restitution, and          in this Report. Most uncaptioned photographs are not
immunity for offenses they were forced to commit            images of confirmed trafficking victims. Still, they illustrate
during the course of the victimization.                     the myriad forms of exploitation that comprise human
                                                            trafficking and the variety of situations in which trafficking
Another early step, while seemingly obvious, is             victims are found.
nevertheless one of the greatest challenges to anti-
trafficking efforts in general: finding the victims
and getting them out of harm’s way. The strongest
victim protection scheme is useless if victims remain trapped in exploitation. Governments cannot sit
back and wait for victims to self-identify; rather, they must proactively seek victims out by investigating
high-risk sectors, screening vulnerable populations, and training relevant government officials to recognize
trafficking when they see it. It is vital that victims not be treated like criminals or be subjected to arrest or
deportation for other offenses.

The best approaches to victim identification are those that involve government partnerships with communities,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and international organizations that can provide expertise on
identifying trafficking victims and attending to their needs. For example, when police conduct raids of
brothels, collaboration with NGOs can help police identify potential trafficking victims and refer them for
                                                                                                                                            7
                                     protective services. Police can notify service providers
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     that a raid is imminent, and the shelter can provide
                                     victims with immediate assistance.
                                                                                                    Cambodia
                                     Once victims are identified, government and civil              Kieu’s family relied on their local pond for their
                                     society must ensure services are available to meet             livelihood. When her father became ill, the nets they
                                     victims’ immediate needs: health care, a bed for the           used fell into disrepair. Mending them would cost the
                                     night, immediate protection for themselves and their           equivalent of approximately $200 they did not have.
                                                                                                    Her parents turned to a loan shark whose exorbitant
                                     family members, and counseling. These earliest stages
                                                                                                    interest rates quickly ballooned their debt to the
                                     of care are essential in easing victims out of crisis and      equivalent of approximately $9,000. “Virgin selling”
                                     setting the stage for sustained, long-term support.            was a common practice in their community, and Kieu’s
                                                                                                    mother, after acquiring a “certificate of virginity” from
                                     Earlier publications of the Trafficking in Persons Report      the hospital, sold her to a man at a hotel. Kieu was 12
                                     deal with these issues in greater detail (specifically         years old. Upon hearing that she was to be sold again,
                                     the 2012 and 2013 installments with respect to victim          Kieu fled, making her way to a safe house where she
                                     identification and protection), and provide a more             could recover. Kieu is now self-sufficient and hopes
                                     comprehensive overview of what governments can do              to start her own business.
                                     to take the first steps of a victim-centered approach.
                                     Everything that follows relates to establishing this
                                     framework successfully.


                                     Dignity, Security, and Respect
                                     Meeting the immediate needs of victims of human trafficking after their identification is critical. These
                                     individuals have often endured horrific physical, psychological, and/or sexual abuse at the hands of their
                                     traffickers and others. But victim services that focus on providing support only until individuals are physically
                                     well enough to be sent on their way—or put in line for deportation—are insufficient. Those who have been
                                     enslaved have endured more than physical harm. They have been robbed of their freedom, including the
                                     freedom to make choices about their own lives. Medical care and a few nights in a shelter do not make
                                     a victim whole again. Even as the physical wounds are salved and begin healing, a major element of the
                                     recovery process is helping victims regain their agency, their dignity, and the confidence to make choices
                                     about how to move forward with their lives.


                                     President Barack Obama and His Holiness Pope Francis at the Vatican during their first meeting. The Pontiff’s
                                     position on modern slavery is clear: when any man, woman, or child is enslaved anywhere, it is a threat to peace,
                                     justice, and human dignity everywhere.




                                        “      I exhort the international
                                                community to adopt an
                                              even more unanimous and
                                               effective strategy against
                                             human trafficking, so that in
                                                every part of the world,
                                               men and women may no
                                              longer be used as a means
                                                       to an end. ”
                                                     – Pope Francis, 2013




            8
       HUMAN TRAFFICKING DEFINED




                                                                                                                              THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
       The TVPA defines “severe forms of trafficking in persons” as:

       ❖❖ s ex trafficking in which a commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the
           person induced to perform such an act has not attained 18 years of age; or

       ❖❖ t he recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for labor or services,
           through the use of force, fraud, or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude,
           peonage, debt bondage, or slavery.

       A victim need not be physically transported from one location to another in order for the crime to fall
       within these definitions.




A girl sells tomatoes streetside in Benin. Vidomegon is a tradition ostensibly to offer children educational and vocational
opportunities by sending them to wealthy homes, but instead is often used to exploit children in forced labor.




                                                                                                                                           9
                                     The Vulnerability of LGBT Individuals to
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     Human Trafficking


                                     L
                                          esbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons around the world often experience discrimination
                                          and elevated threats of violence because of their sexual orientation or gender identity. In 2013, the
                                          International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Intersex Association (ILGA) reported that nearly
                                     80 countries had laws that criminalize people on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. LGBT
                                     persons face elevated threats of violence and discrimination in employment, healthcare, and educational
                                     opportunities. Some family members have ostracized LGBT relatives from their homes. The cumulative
                                     effects of homophobia and discrimination make LGBT persons particularly vulnerable to traffickers who
                                     prey on the desperation of those who wish to escape social alienation and maltreatment.

                                     Governments and NGOs have made progress in identifying LGBT trafficking victims and highlighting the
                                     vulnerability of LGBT persons to crimes such as human trafficking. For example, in 2013, NGOs working
                                     on LGBT issues in Argentina identified traffickers who promised transgender women job opportunities in
                                     Europe, but instead confiscated their passports and forced them into prostitution. Police in the Philippines
                                     have identified LGBT trafficking victims during anti-trafficking operations. Civil society in South Africa
                                     has identified instances of traffickers coercing LGBT children to remain in prostitution under threat of
                                     disclosing their sexual orientation or gender identity to their families. As part of the 2013-2017 Federal
                                     Strategic Action Plan on Services for Victims of Trafficking in the United States, U.S. agencies have committed
                                     to gathering information on the needs of LGBT victims of human trafficking. NGOs in the United States
                                     estimate LGBT homeless youth comprise 20 to 40 percent of the homeless youth population; these youth
                                     are at particularly high risk of being forced into prostitution.

                                     Biases and discrimination severely complicate proper identification of, and provision of care to, LGBT
                                     victims of human trafficking. Law enforcement officials and service providers should partner with LGBT
                                     organizations to enhance victim identification efforts and adapt assistance services to meet the unique
                                     needs of LGBT victims. LGBT victims of human trafficking should also be included in the dialogue on
                                     these issues as well as on helping victims become survivors.



                                        Countries in the TIP Report that are NOT States
                                        Parties to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
                                        Punish Trafficking In Persons, Especially Women
                                       and Children, Supplementing the United Nations
                                      Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime


                                     Afghanistan                            Japan                                  Somalia
                                     Angola                                 Korea (DPRK)                           South Sudan
                                     Bangladesh                             Korea, Republic of                     Sri Lanka
                                     Barbados                               Maldives                               Sudan
                                     Bhutan                                 Marshall Islands                       Tonga
                                     Brunei                                 Nepal                                  Uganda
                                     Comoros                                Pakistan                               Yemen
                                     Congo, Republic of                     Palau
                                     Czech Republic                         Papua New Guinea
                                     Eritrea                                Sierra Leone
                                     Fiji                                   Singapore
                                     Iran                                   Solomon Islands

      10
                                                                                                                        THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
                                                                                 Two Chinese laborers, ages 23
                                                                                 and 22, are working in the Ibaraki
                                                                                 prefecture, north of Tokyo,
                                                                                 through the Japanese
                                                                                 government’s Technical Intern
                                                                                 Training Program. Although the
                                                                                 program was intended to develop
                                                                                 technical expertise for the
                                                                                 participants, many work as
                                                                                 low-skilled laborers, exposed to
                                                                                 harsh conditions and vulnerable
                                                                                 to forced labor.




Those working with victims must respect their choices and freedom, including the right to refuse services.
This respect must guide all efforts to provide support. If victims want to walk away as soon as they have
escaped modern slavery, that decision should be in their control. What governments can control, however,
is the range of services and support available to victims so that they have a menu of options from which
to choose.

One of the most important needs of recently-liberated trafficking victims is a place to stay that is safe, yet
that also respects their freedom and autonomy.

As the work of the anti-trafficking movement has shown, not all “shelters” are worthy of the title. In recent
years, victims of trafficking around the world have broken free from their exploitation only to find themselves
locked in so-called shelters that more closely resemble detention centers than havens of support and safety.
In some places, governments succeed in identifying trafficking victims and then place them into large
populations of refugees and asylum seekers, where services are not tailored to their specific needs. Trafficked
persons housed in mixed-use shelters may also face stigma from other residents for their participation in
prostitution or crimes they were forced to commit during their servitude.

Such environments fail to support a victim’s sense of independence and agency. Worse still, confinement
and isolation—which were likely part of their exploitation—have the potential to re-traumatize.

I deally, a shelter is a place where a trafficked person is free to stay, leave, and return again if he or she feels
 the need. To be sure, such facilities need to be safe and secure. Certain procedures and policies can be put
 in place to guarantee security, such as restrictions on who is allowed to enter a facility or even know the
 address. Of course, additional structures and restrictions are necessary for child victims. An effective shelter
 promotes, rather than hinders, a victim’s freedom of movement. And where independent living is in the best
 interest of the trafficked person, the use of the shelter as more of a drop-in center may be most appropriate.



                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                               Ideally, shelters work closely with other service
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                                                                               providers to support the trafficked person well
                                       United States                                           beyond the physical and psychological care that
                                                                                               may be required initially. Individuals who do not
                                       When teenager Melissa ran away from home, she was       speak the local language may need interpretation
                                       quickly found by a man who promised her help, but       services or access to language classes. Migrant victims
                                       was actually a pimp who intended to sexually exploit    may need assistance obtaining immigration status
                                       her. He used psychological manipulation and coercion    from authorities. Victims who are playing a role in
                                       to hold her in prostitution, and advertised her using
                                                                                               the prosecution of their abuser or who are seeking
                                       online sites. Refusal to do what he said was met by
                                       beatings and threats. Despite her fear of being found   restitution require legal services (see next page for
                                       and killed if she ran, Melissa one day managed to       additional details on access to justice for victims).
                                       escape from a hotel room where he was keeping her.
                                       A patron at another hotel nearby helped her reach        As trafficked persons become more independent, they
                                       the police, who arrested her trafficker.                 often need support in finding housing, job training,
                                                                                                education, and employment. Best practices are to not
                                                                                                place conditions on access to such support by requiring
                                                                                                victims to participate in a criminal investigation, or to
                                     live in a particular shelter, or to follow a prescribed course for recovery. Assistance options are most effective
                                     if they are flexible and adaptive, reflecting the difficulty in predicting what a victim may need as he or she
                                     takes steps toward becoming a survivor. In any case, well-designed, long-term assistance does not involve
                                     telling a victim what he or she must do with his or her life, but rather entails providing the help requested
                                     to help each individual reach personal goals.

                                     Even though governments are responsible for making sure assistance for victims is available, government
                                     agencies themselves are often not the best direct providers of care. Here is where the importance of strong
                                     partnerships becomes clear. In many countries around the world, NGOs, international organizations, and
                                     civil society groups are already providing quality assistance to victims. Many of these efforts are underfunded,
                                     and many do not have nearly the capacity to deal with the full magnitude of the problem in their regions.
                                     But when government works with civil society to amplify resources and expertise, survivors stand to benefit
                                     from enhanced services and protections.




       12
     “




                                                                                                                       THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
         We need people to know this is going on, and we need trained people in our
          congregations, Federations, and agencies at all levels, to identify signs of
         trafficking. . . . Most of us were not aware that this was impacting our own
      communities, but the issue is serious and widespread. Human trafficking is not only
        happening to foreign nationals. It’s happening to kids in our own communities.”
                                  – Susan K. Stern, chair of the Jewish Federations of
                                       North America National Campaign, 2013

      Additionally, government collaboration with private-sector partners can help open up job opportunities to
      survivors. Some companies have already adopted anti-trafficking policies and practices to crack down on
      trafficking in supply chains and to train employees to identify trafficking when they see it. Another approach
      companies can take is to offer survivors employment programs and a more promising path forward.


      Access to Justice
      A government’s obligation to confront modern slavery is tied to the fact that trafficking in persons is first
      and foremost a crime, and only governments can prosecute suspects and incarcerate criminals. Similarly,
      only governments can confer immigration benefits or mandate restitution to victims of a crime. In the same
      way a government guarantees the rights of its citizens, a government has a responsibility to uphold the rule
      of law by punishing those who run afoul of it.

      In cases of human trafficking, the government’s pursuit of justice has effects that reach beyond maintaining
      the sanctity of law. For those who have endured the brutality of modern slavery, seeing their abusers brought
      to justice can have an enormous positive impact on their recovery process. In addition to broader benefits
      of removing a criminal from the streets, victims’ knowledge that those who enslaved them can no longer
      do them or others harm can play a major role in helping overcome their trauma.


Survivors and staff of the Coalition to Abolish Slavery & Trafficking (CAST) receive the Presidential Award for
Extraordinary Efforts to Combat Trafficking in Persons from U.S. Secretary of State John F. Kerry and Ambassador-at-
Large to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons Luis CdeBaca at the annual meeting of the President’s Interagency
Task Force to Combat Trafficking in Persons at the White House on April 8, 2014.




                                                                                                                               13
                                     The Use of Forced Criminality: Victims Hidden
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     Behind a Crime


                                     M
                                              ethods used by human traffickers continue to evolve, as does the understanding of this crime
                                              among law enforcement and anti-trafficking activists. One distinct, yet often under-identified,
                                              characteristic of human trafficking is forced criminality. Traffickers may force adults and children
                                     to commit crimes in the course of their victimization, including theft, illicit drug production and transport,
                                     prostitution, terrorism, and murder. For example, in Mexico, organized criminal groups have coerced
                                     children and migrants to work as assassins and in the production, transportation, and sale of drugs. In
                                     November 2013, police arrested six adult Roma accused of forcing their children to commit burglaries in
                                     Paris and its suburbs. The victims were reportedly physically beaten for failure to deliver a daily quota of
                                     stolen goods. In Afghanistan, insurgent groups force older Afghan children to serve as suicide bombers.
                                     Non-state militant groups in Pakistan force children—some as young as 9 years old—to serve as suicide
                                     bombers in both Pakistan and Afghanistan. Children and men, primarily from Vietnam and China, have
                                     been forced to work on cannabis farms in the United Kingdom and Denmark through the use of verbal
                                     and physical threats and intimidation.

                                     Victims of trafficking should not be held liable for their involvement in unlawful activities that are a direct
                                     consequence of their victimization. Trafficked individuals who are forced to commit a crime are commonly
                                     mistaken for criminals—rather than being identified as victims—and therefore treated as such by law
                                     enforcement and judicial officials. Many victims of trafficking remain undetected among those who have
                                     committed crimes because of a lack of proper victim identification and screening. One example in the United
                                     States involves victims of human trafficking who are forced to commit commercial sex acts, and are then
                                     prosecuted by state or local officials for prostitution or prostitution-related activity. Many states, including
                                     New York State, have passed laws to allow trafficking victims to overturn or vacate these convictions where
                                     criminal activity was committed as part of the trafficking situation. In 2009, three Vietnamese children
                                     were arrested for working on cannabis farms in the United Kingdom, convicted for drug offenses, and
                                     sentenced to imprisonment. An appellate court, however, overturned the convictions in 2013, holding
                                     that the children were victims of trafficking. This case reflects a growing awareness that victims of human
                                     trafficking involved in forced criminality should be shielded from prosecution. It also demonstrates the
                                     difficulties that law enforcement and judicial officials face when combating crimes and enforcing the law.

                                     It is important that governments develop and implement policies to identify trafficking victims who
                                     are forced to participate in criminal activity in the course of their victimization, and provide them with
                                     appropriate protective services. In addition to general awareness training on human trafficking, training
                                     law enforcement and judicial officials about the principles of non-punishment and non-prosecution of
                                     victims is key to increasing the likelihood that individuals will be properly identified by the authorities,
                                     and thereby secure access to justice and protection.




                                                                                                                  At a Department of State “TechCamp”
                                                                                                                  workshop in Mexico, over 80
                                                                                                                  participants discussed best practices
                                                                                                                  for integrating technology in the fight
                                                                                                                  against human trafficking.




      14
                                                                                                                  THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
When she was only 11 years old, “Guddi” was recruited by a woman from her village to work as a domestic
servant. When she arrived in the city, however, she was taken to a brothel in the red light district and forced
into prostitution. She has been trapped in debt bondage by her trafficker ever since.




                                                                                                                          15
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                                                                                                                  Eastern European women wait
                                                                                                                                  for customers in a Tel Aviv
                                                                                                                                  brothel. Women from Ukraine,
                                                                                                                                  Russia, Moldova, Uzbekistan,
                                                                                                                                  China, Ghana, and to a lesser
                                                                                                                                  extent South America, are
                                                                                                                                  vulnerable to sex trafficking
                                                                                                                                  in Israel.




                                     Thus, the “prosecution” component of the “3P” paradigm of prosecution, protection, and prevention cannot
                                     be fully separated from the “protection” element, as the prosecution of traffickers can be very significant in
                                     the long-term protection of victims.

                                     Around the world, many promising practices have emerged in recent years that are improving the way
                                     governments prosecute trafficking in persons cases. Specialized courts, extensive training for judges,
                                     prosecutors, and law enforcement, and procedures to expedite trafficking cases through judicial systems
                                     are making a difference in securing more trafficking convictions, putting more abusers behind bars, and
                                     providing a sense of justice to more victims.

                                     Of course, victims themselves often play an integral role in the successful prosecution of trafficking cases
                                     as witnesses or assisting with investigations in other ways. Victims are often hesitant to cooperate with
                                     authorities. Some may not even acknowledge or realize that they are victims of a crime, or because of
                                     dependency or “trauma bonding” may still harbor
                                     affection for their abusers or have conflicted feelings
                                     about criminal charges. It is not unusual for a victim
                                     to choose not to cooperate with authorities, testify in
                                                                                                   Romania – England
                                     open court, or confront his or her trafficker. A victim-
                                     centered approach to prosecutions, however, has proven      Ioana and her boyfriend had been dating for a year
                                                                                                 when they decided to move to England together. He
                                     effective in bringing more victims along as participants    arranged everything for the move, including housing,
                                     in the investigation and prosecution of their traffickers.  and Ioana left her job and family in Romania with
                                                                                                   excitement for a better life. When she arrived in
                                     The most successful legal and judicial systems employ         Manchester, everything changed. Her “boyfriend”
                                     “victim-witness coordinators” to work directly with           and a friend created a profile for Ioana on an adult
                                     individuals and their advocates to help them navigate         website and began advertising her for sex, arranging
                                     the criminal justice system. Ideally, these coordinators      clients, and taking all of her earnings. She was afraid
                                     bring expertise in dealing directly with victims and          to try to escape, because he had become violent. Now
                                     experience in ascertaining their needs and willingness        safe, Ioana speaks out about her experience: “I don’t
                                                                                                   want this to happen to any other girls again.”
                                     to collaborate with law enforcement. When victims
                                     choose to participate in prosecution efforts, properly


      16
                                                                                                                    THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
A young child brings tea to customers in Nepal, as two school children wait for the bus behind him. Poverty and
lack of schooling increase the vulnerability of millions of children worldwide to forced labor and debt bondage.




“     Having survived trafficking at the age of 12, I knew, from my own experience,
       that each time victims were stopped by police or treated like criminals, they
                           were pushed closer to their trafficker. ”
                         – Carissa Phelps, founder and CEO of Runaway Girl, FPC, 2013


trained victim-witness coordinators can counsel them on what role they will play and help them prepare
for depositions or court appearances. Throughout the recovery process, it is ideal for victims to have access
to their own legal counsel as well.

Victims need assistance and so do law enforcement officials. Experts from civil society can provide training
and assistance to law enforcement agencies working with trafficking victims. These partnerships help to
create cooperative relationships between law enforcement and service providers. A trusting relationship
benefits prosecution efforts and trafficking victims alike. Law enforcement officials who work regularly
with victim service providers and advocates gain a better understanding of the needs and situations of
trafficking victims. Advocates and attorneys who know and trust their law enforcement counterparts are
better equipped to provide guidance and support to victims as they decide to come forward and assist with
prosecutions without fear that the victims under their care will be mistreated.

Justice is not just limited to seeing a trafficker put behind bars. Ideally, in addition to jail time, an anti-
trafficking law includes provisions that impose on traffickers an obligation to provide restitution for the loss
that resulted from their victim’s enslavement and damages for any injuries. In the United States, restitution
to trafficking victims is mandatory in criminal cases. Effective and early seizure of a trafficker’s assets can
sometimes help ensure that restitution is not just ordered, but in fact paid. Of course, there will be times when
a trafficker will not be able to pay what is owed to the victim. In such cases, a government can take steps to
ensure that the burden of the loss and injury does not fall solely on the victim. Crime victim compensation
programs can be established to help remedy at least some of the loss.


                                                                                                                            17
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                     “   Any support offered to victims of trafficking needs to be given in a way that restores
                                          a sense of control for the victims over their own lives. . . . When support is provided
                                           in a way that does not respect the will of the victims, or is even provided against
                                         their will, this may result in further trauma and a continuation of their victimization.”
                                          – Annette Lyth, Regional project manager of the Greater Mekong Sub-region of Southeast Asia for the
                                                               UN Interagency Project on Human Trafficking (UNIAP), 2013




      18
Marginalized Communities: Romani Victims




                                                                                                                 THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
of Trafficking


R
      omani—also known as Roma, Roms, or Romane—are one of the largest minority groups in Europe
      and are highly vulnerable to human trafficking. Ethnic Romani men, women, and particularly
      children are subjected to sex trafficking and forced labor—including forced begging, forced criminality,
involuntary domestic servitude, and servile marriages—throughout Europe, including in Western Europe,
Central Europe, and the Balkans. This exploitation occurs both internally, especially in countries with
large native Romani populations, and transnationally. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Ministerial Council issued a decision in December 2013 that called on participating States
to take measures to address Romani victims of human trafficking.

Like other marginalized groups across the world, Romani are particularly vulnerable to trafficking due to
poverty, multi-generational social exclusion, and discrimination—including lack of access to a variety of
social services, education, and employment. For instance, because of poor access to credit and employment
opportunities, Romani often resort to using informal moneylenders that charge exorbitant interest rates,
contributing to high levels of debt, which heighten trafficking vulnerability. Furthermore, recorded cases
also exist of exploiters fraudulently claiming social benefits from Romani trafficking victims, depriving
victims of this assistance.

In general, European governments do not adequately address the issue of identifying and protecting Romani
trafficking victims. Victim protection services and prevention campaigns are often not accessible to the
Romani community, as they are at times denied services based on their ethnicity or are located in isolated
areas where services are not available. Law enforcement and other officials are typically not trained in or
sensitized to trafficking issues in the Romani community. At times, combating trafficking has been used
as a pretext to promote discriminatory policies against Romani, such as forced evictions and arbitrary
arrests and detention.

Many Romani victims are hesitant to seek assistance from the police because they distrust authorities
due to historic discrimination and a fear of unjust prosecution. In some instances, police have penalized
Romani victims for committing illegal acts as a result of being trafficked, such as being forced to engage
in petty theft. Furthermore, in those countries in which governments rely on victims to self-identify, this
mistrust can result in disproportionately small numbers of Romani victims identified, which can contribute
to continued exploitation of victims. The lack of formal victim identification may also lead to an absence
of protection services, which in turn can result in increased vulnerability to re-trafficking.

Some policy recommendations to address the needs of Romani victims of
human trafficking include:

  ➤➤    overnments should include full and effective participation of Romani communities and
       G
       organizations in anti-trafficking bodies, including anti-trafficking law enforcement and victim
       identification groups.
  ➤➤    rafficking prevention campaigns and efforts should be targeted to Romani communities, particularly
       T
       those that are segregated and socially excluded.
  ➤➤    overnments should improve access to prevention and protection services, such as public awareness
       G
       campaigns for communities and law enforcement, and adequate shelters, legal and social services,
       and vocational assistance.
  ➤➤    aw enforcement should not impose criminal liability on trafficking victims, including Romani,
       L
       for crimes they were forced to commit.
  ➤➤   Anti-trafficking policies should explicitly recognize the Romani as a vulnerable group.




                                                                                                                        19
                                     Human Trafficking and Major Sporting Events
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT


                                     M
                                              ajor sporting events—such as the Olympics, World Cup, and Super Bowl—provide both an
                                              opportunity to raise awareness about human trafficking as well as a challenge to identify trafficking
                                              victims and prosecute traffickers who take advantage of these events. Successful anti-trafficking
                                     efforts must be comprehensive and sustainable, addressing both labor and sex trafficking conditions before,
                                     during, and after such events.

                                     Prior to the Event: Major sporting events often entail massive capital improvement and infrastructure
                                     projects, creating a huge demand for cost-effective labor and materials. Governments and civil society
                                     can take steps to prevent this significant increase in construction from being accompanied by an increase
                                     in forced labor. Governments should ensure labor laws meet international standards, regulate labor
                                     recruitment agencies, and frequently inspect construction sites for violations of labor laws. To prepare for
                                     the 2012 Olympics in London, the London Councils, a government association in the United Kingdom,
                                     commissioned a report on the potential impact of the Olympics on human trafficking. Governments in
                                     countries hosting major sporting events may wish to consider similar analyses to identify potential gaps in
                                     human trafficking responses. These strategies will be particularly important in countries planning to host
                                     future Olympics (Brazil in 2016, South Korea in 2018, and Japan in 2020) and World Cup tournaments
                                     (Russia in 2018 and Qatar in 2022).

                                     Game Day: Increased commerce, tourism, and media attention accompany major sporting events.
                                     Unfortunately, there is a lack of hard data on the prevalence of human trafficking—including sex trafficking
                                     —associated with these events. Governments and civil society—including the airline and hospitality
                                     sectors—can collaborate to combat trafficking by launching media campaigns, training law enforcement
                                     officials and event volunteers, and establishing partnerships to recognize indicators of human trafficking
                                     and to identify victims. Additional data collection of human trafficking surrounding major sporting events
                                     will inform future anti-trafficking efforts.

                                     After the Event Concludes: Modern slavery is a 365-day-a-year crime that requires a 365-day-a-year
                                     response. Traffickers do not cease operations once a sporting event concludes, and stadiums and surrounding
                                     areas can remain popular destinations for travel and tourism. The lasting effect of anti-trafficking efforts
                                     associated with major sporting events can be even more important than the impact of those efforts during
                                     the event itself. This ripple effect can take the form of enhanced partnerships between law enforcement
                                     officials, service providers, and the tourism industry, or simply sports fans sustaining the anti-trafficking
                                     efforts that they learned about during the event.




                                     The End It Movement launched a campaign at the 2013 NCAA Final Four basketball tournament in Atlanta, Georgia
                                     to bring awareness to the reality of sex trafficking in the United States. Young actresses portrayed victims of sex
                                     trafficking.




      20
“  On the day I was rescued, I knew three words in English: “hi,” “dolphin,” and




                                                                                                                       THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
  “stepsister.” I now believe my captors intentionally kept anything from me that
 might teach me the language, because knowledge of English could have given me
      more power. Something captors do well is keep their slaves powerless.”
                                                  – Shyima Hall

The 2009 Trafficking in Persons
Report highlighted the story of
Shyima Hall, an Egyptian girl
who was sold by her parents
at the age of eight to a wealthy
Egyptian couple. When the
family subsequently moved
to California, they smuggled
her into the United States on
a temporary visa and put her
to work up to 20 hours a day
in their large suburban home.
They confiscated her passport
and regularly verbally and
physically assaulted her; Shyima
suffered for four years before
a neighbor filed an anonymous
complaint with the state child
welfare agency, leading to her
rescue. Since that time, she has taken remarkable steps to rebuild her life and to bring awareness to the reality of
trafficking around the world. She has gone to college and in 2011 became a United States citizen. Shyima recently
released a memoir that tells the story of her childhood, harrowing slavery, and undeniable resilience. She now
calls her life “heaven,” and dreams of becoming a police officer or immigration agent to help other victims of
trafficking.




                                                                                                                               21
                                     Promising Practices in the Eradication
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     of Trafficking in Persons

                                     I
                                       nnovation and technology are essential in the fight against human trafficking. The private sector, anti-
                                       trafficking advocates, law enforcement officials, academics, and governments are working together
                                       to develop innovative solutions to address the complexities involved in both fighting this crime and
                                     supporting victims as they strive to restore their lives. Examples of these promising practices include:


                                     Mobile Technologies in Uganda:
                                     In partnership with the Government of Norway, International Organization for Migration (IOM) caseworkers
                                     in the field are using mobile technologies in Uganda to collect information about the protection needs of
                                     trafficked children. The data, which caseworkers capture using smart phones and then send to a central
                                     database for storage, aggregation, and analysis, identifies trends in the trafficking of children from rural
                                     to urban areas. IOM uses these trends and patterns to guide the project’s anti-trafficking strategy. The web
                                     application of the database displays live charts that show anonymous and disaggregated data in a visual
                                     format for public viewing.


                                     “TechCamps” in Phnom Penh and Tlaxcala:
                                     Department of State “TechCamps” bring local and regional civil society organizations together with
                                     technologists to develop solutions to challenges faced in particular communities. In September 2013,
                                     the U.S. Embassy in Cambodia hosted the first-ever “TechCamp” focused on using technology to address
                                     challenges in combating modern slavery in Southeast Asia. Challenges ranged from providing hotline
                                     information to labor migrants to reducing social stigma for sex trafficking survivors. The McCain Institute
                                     for International Leadership provided seed funding for two local projects after the Phnom Penh event.
                                     The U.S. Embassy in Mexico also hosted a “TechCamp” in Tlaxcala, a state facing significant challenges
                                     in combating sex trafficking. “TechCamp” Mexico focused on developing low-cost, easily-implemented
                                     solutions, including interactive soap operas to increase public awareness about trafficking and data scraping
                                     to map high-risk areas.


                                     Technology to Identify and Serve Victims:
                                     The White House Forum to Combat Human Trafficking in 2013 brought stakeholders together with survivors
                                     to highlight technology that is being used to help identify victims, connect them to services, and bring
                                     traffickers to justice. The forum featured new technology being used by the National Human Trafficking
                                     Resource Center (NHTRC) hotline, including the development of a system for individuals to connect
                                     discreetly with NHTRC through text messages in addition to a toll-free hotline. Additionally, Polaris Project,
                                     working with Google, software companies, and other NGOs, launched a Global Human Trafficking Hotline
                                     Network project to help create a more coordinated global response for victims of trafficking.


                                     Identifying Irregular Financial Transactions:
                                     Collaboration between the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office, the Thomson Reuters Foundation,
                                     and financial institutions and foundations is helping corporations to identify potential cases of human
                                     trafficking by looking for irregularities and red flags in financial transactions. American Express, Bank of
                                     America, Barclays, Citigroup, the Human Trafficking Pro Bono Legal Center, JPMorgan Chase & Co., TD
                                     Bank, Theodore S. Greenberg, Polaris Project, Wells Fargo, and Western Union participated in the effort.
                                     The U.S. Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), in dialogue with other U.S. agencies, private
                                     industry, NGOs, academia, and law enforcement, launched a similar initiative to identify financial red
                                     flags and provide guidance to financial institutions on how to detect and properly report suspected human
                                     trafficking. FinCEN’s goal is to supplement and aid law enforcement investigations by supporting the effective
                                     detection and reporting of human trafficking financing through Suspicious Activity Reports. Through these
                                     efforts, financial institutions are developing the ability to identify suspicious financial activity that may
                                     help identify human traffickers.




       22
       Clearing the Way




                                                                                                                               THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
       Working together with a wide range of partners,
       governments can set up a system of protection and
       support services that help victims along every step of
       their journey, from the moment they are identified            INDIA
       as trafficking victims, to the delivery of care for their
       immediate injuries, to the transition support and long-       Still a teenager, Aanya dropped out of school with the
       term services. Partnerships help these efforts succeed.       hope of finding work to help her family. Leaving her
                                                                     home in a region rife with poverty, Aanya arrived in
      Governments alone have authority over certain                  the capital and felt lucky to find work in an upscale
      regulatory, structural, and environmental factors.             neighborhood through a domestic worker placement
      For example, a shelter may be equipped to provide              agency. Rather than a good job, Aanya ended up
      continuing, long-term support for victims. But if a            enslaved in a home, locked in, and abused by her
      country’s trafficking law mandates that individuals            employer. For months she endured violent beatings and
      can obtain services only for a limited period of time or       isolation. Terrified, she worked without pay, forbidden
                                                                     from interacting with—or even calling—anyone she
      that services are wholly contingent upon cooperation           knew. With the help of police and anti-trafficking
      with authorities, victims may not receive essential            activists, Aanya escaped, and her case has gone to
      long-term care. Even when training, education, and job         court. Back home with her family and re-enrolled in
      placement programs may be available, immigration               school, Aanya is receiving follow-up care.
      laws can prohibit a migrant victim from working
      legally and taking those next steps forward. Conversely,
      citizen victims risk exclusion if victim-care structures
      are designed only for foreign victims.




A New York based non-profit serving women in South and Southeast Asia, the Nomi Network, aims to create economic
opportunities for survivors and women and girls at risk of human trafficking. The women and girls pictured here are from
the first class of graduates from a new training program.




                                                                                                                                       23
                                     All over the world, however, laws and regulations hinder NGOs and well-intentioned government officials
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     from providing the services that victims need. These obstacles may be unintentional, such as existing laws
                                     designed to deal with other issues that inadvertently affect a government’s attempt to confront trafficking.
                                     They may reflect attitudes toward particular groups—such as immigrants, people in prostitution, persons
                                     with disabilities, or LGBT individuals—that fail to recognize that modern slavery occurs among all groups,
                                     including the stigmatized or marginalized. Governments should do whatever is necessary to make sure no
                                     law, policy, or regulation prevents a trafficker from being prosecuted, or a victim from being identified and
                                     becoming a survivor.


                                     The Survivor’s Voice: Guiding the Way Forward
                                     The approaches and practices that this Report recommends are not a panacea for the challenge of modern
                                     slavery, nor do they offer a perfect solution for what trafficked persons need. The search for those answers
                                     is what continues to drive the fight against modern slavery forward.

                                     In this fight, survivors play a vital role in finding better solutions. Those who have made the journey from
                                     victim to survivor have done so in ways as unique as each individual and his or her own experience.

                                     More than a few survivors have chosen to refocus their talents, their passions, and their experiences back
                                     into the struggle against modern slavery.

                                     Survivors run shelters, advocate before legislatures, train law enforcement officials, and meet with presidents
                                     and prime ministers to push for a more robust response to this crime. No one can explain the barbarity of
                                     modern slavery as well as someone who has endured it, and no one can better evaluate what works and what
                                     does not as governments and partners come to the aid of those still in bondage. It has been inspiring to see
                                     survivors seemingly set apart by the differences of their cases find the commonality of their experiences
                                     and forge a new understanding of a crime that they best comprehend.

                                     In addition to helping victims on their journeys to become survivors, governments can also benefit from
                                     opening the door to them as experts, colleagues, policymakers, and advocates.




                                        A young girl waits for
                                        clients on the side of the
                                        road in Bangkok, Thailand.
                                        Many women and girls
                                        from within Thailand
                                        and from neighboring
                                        countries are victims of
                                        sex trafficking, often to
                                        meet the demand of sex
                                        tourists from countries in
                                        the region and elsewhere.




      24
       Making the Problem Worse: Off-Duty Law




                                                                                                                          THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
       Enforcement Officers Providing Security in
       High-Risk Establishments


       A
               t times, trafficking offenders employ off-duty law enforcement officers to provide nighttime security
               in clubs, bars, or other establishments that are at high risk of being a venue for trafficking. This
               practice likely inhibits the willingness of law enforcement authorities to investigate allegations of
       human trafficking. Off-duty officers on the payroll of an establishment engaging in human trafficking
       may be less likely to report or investigate a potential trafficking situation at that locale. In addition, their
       law enforcement colleagues who do not work in the establishment may feel pressure to look the other
       way, rather than risk compromising their fellow officers. The practice of off-duty law enforcement officers
       working other security jobs may also have a negative impact on the community’s perception of the role
       of law enforcement. Most significantly, potential trafficking victims are not likely to turn to these law
       enforcement officers for help or trust a police officer who works in, and potentially enables, an environment
       where exploitation is occurring.

       Governments can help by discouraging law enforcement officials from providing security in their off-duty
       hours to such establishments. Governments can also conduct sensitization training for law enforcement
       that includes a human trafficking component and by prosecuting officials found to be complicit in human
       trafficking. Further, governments can develop codes of conduct for officials that outline clear conflicts of
       interest in regard to off-duty employment and encourage trafficking victim identification and referral.




This is one of the oldest brothels in the
red light district of Mumabi, India. On
each floor, enforcers guard the rooms.
Women from Bangladesh, Nepal, and
India are subjected to sex trafficking in
Mumbai’s commercial sex trade.




                                                                                                                                  25
                                     The stories of those survivors—the stories of all
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     survivors—are living, breathing reminders of why
                                     governments must live up to their responsibility to          PERU
                                     combat this serious crime in all its forms. If a survivor-
                                     turned-advocate had been misidentified and treated as        Oscar’s cousin worked in a bar in the gold mining
                                     a criminal, perhaps today she would not be working           region of Peru and told him stories of being paid in
                                     for the freedom of more who are enslaved. If a survivor      chunks of gold. Oscar, 16 at the time, left home in
                                     who was reunited with his family was instead deported        hopes of finding similar work. Upon arrival, the mine
                                                                                                  owner told him that he had to work 90 days to repay
                                     back to the country where he was originally exploited,       the fee his cousin received for recruiting him, and
                                     perhaps today he would not be working to give his            because the owner controlled the river traffic, there
                                     children a bright future. If survivors who were treated      were no options for escape. Oscar then realized he
                                     with respect and understanding were instead viewed           had been sold into slavery. Oscar contracted malaria
                                     as pariahs and forced out on the streets, perhaps today      but was refused medical attention and left to die in
                                     they would once again be victims.                            a hut; the other workers cared for him and fed him
                                                                                                  out of their own meager rations. Too weak to work
                                     This Report has in the past noted the legacy of Frederick    in the mines, he was forced to work in the kitchens.
                                     Douglass. A hero of the abolitionist movement,               After the 90 days were completed, Oscar packed his
                                                                                                  bags to leave, but the boss told him he was not free
                                     Douglass effected change not only through his                because he was only credited for working 30 days.
                                     compelling accounts of life as an enslaved child servant     Oscar was not credited with 90 days’ work until he
                                     and farmworker, but also through his activism and            worked for eight months. Upon his return from the
                                     advocacy. Fittingly, it was this survivor of slavery         Amazon, Oscar was hospitalized for yellow fever. To
                                     who became one of the United States’ first African-          repay the doctors, he had to borrow money from his
                                     American ambassadors and advocated for women’s               family; Oscar believed the only way to repay that debt
                                     rights. He also accurately predicted that slavery could      was to return to work in the jungle.
                                     reappear if governments left vulnerable migrants
                                     unprotected.




                                     Two women wait for customers in
                                     a street-side brothel. Millions of
                                     Indian women, men, and children are
                                     subjected to sex trafficking.




        26
Reactivating Trauma in Sex Trafficking




                                                                                                                    THE JOURNEY FROM VICTIM TO SURVIVOR
Testimony


S
      ex trafficking victims face a long road to recovery, and testifying against their exploiters can often
      hinder that process. While witness testimony can be an effective and necessary form of evidence for
      a criminal trial, the primary trauma experienced by a victim during the trafficking situation may be
reactivated when recounting the exploitation or confronting the exploiter face-to-face. In many cases, the
victim-witness has been threatened by the trafficker directly warning against reporting to law enforcement,
or the witness’s family members have been threatened or intimidated as a way to prevent cooperation in
an investigation or prosecution. In addition, a victim may fear possible prosecution for unlawful activities
committed as part of the victimization such as prostitution, drug use, and illegal immigration. This fear is
compounded in some cases in which victims experienced previous instances of being treated as criminals,
whether arrested, detained, charged, or even prosecuted. The defense may also cite the victim’s engagement
in criminal activity or criminal record as evidence of his or her lack of credibility. In fact, sometimes victims
are not ideal witnesses. If the victim had a close relationship with the trafficker (also known as trauma
bonding), has a deep-rooted distrust of law enforcement, or fears retaliation, a victim may be a reluctant
or ineffective witness.

The need for resources for victims throughout, and even after, the investigation and prosecution is critical,
especially because some human trafficking trials last several years. During this time, victims often
face financial difficulties—including lack of housing and employment—and continued emotional and
psychological stress, including Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in many cases, resulting from the trafficking
situation, that require long-term medical and mental health care.

To prevent or reduce the chance of reactivating primary trauma, experts encourage government officials to
incorporate a victim-centered approach and provide support to victim-witnesses when investigating and
prosecuting trafficking offenses. Specialized courts to hear human trafficking cases and the designation of
specific prosecutors who have significant experience in handling these cases have led to a greater number of
prosecutions while minimizing victim re-traumatization. Collaboration between law enforcement officials
and NGOs that provide comprehensive victim assistance, including legal and case management services,
has also proven to be a necessary component in successful prosecutions. The Government of Canada, for
example, has fostered partnerships with NGOs through the Victims Fund, resulting in additional support for
victims, such as projects that raise awareness and provide services and assistance. Law enforcement officials
in many countries would benefit from sharing best practices to ensure that victims are not re-traumatized
and traffickers are prosecuted in accordance with due process. Best practices include:

  ➤➤   Interviewing victims in a comfortable, non-group setting with a legal advocate present where possible.
  ➤➤    roviding the option, where legally possible, to pre-record statements for use as evidence to avoid
       P
       the need for repeated accounts of abuse.
  ➤➤   Adopting evidentiary rules to preclude introduction of prior sexual history.
  ➤➤    roviding support—such as victim advocates, free legal counsel, and change in immigration
       P
       status—that is not conditional on live trial testimony.




                                                                                                                            27
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                                                                                  Sadly, for every inspiring story of a survivor who
                                     Philippines –                                                has moved past his or her exploitation, there will be
                                                                                                  too many untold stories of victims unidentified, re-
                                     Saudi Arabia                                                 traumatized, jailed, or worse. For the global struggle
                                                                                                  against modern slavery to succeed, there must be more
                                                                                                   stories of men and women finishing their journey.
                                     Marie left her home for a job as a domestic worker in
                                     Saudi Arabia—the opportunity for a fair wage and a           The journey to becoming a survivor will become a
                                     safe workplace made the sacrifice of leaving her family
                                                                                                  reality for more victims only if many others walk on
                                     and her life in the Philippines seem worth it. In reality,
                                     Marie spent her time in Saudi Arabia being sold from         that path alongside them, whether law enforcement
                                     employer to employer—11 in all. In the last home where       officials, advocates, ministers, or lawmakers. When
                                     she worked, she was beaten severely. After her stay          the burden is shared and when the course points
                                     in the hospital, she was sent home to the Philippines.       toward a common goal, more lives will be restored,
                                     She has never been paid for her months of work.              and slowly, exploitation and enslavement will give
                                                                                                  way to justice, opportunity, and freedom.




                                     “  Human trafficking is, quite simply, the exploitation of human beings for profit. It is
                                        a scourge that is not defeated by barriers of wealth and influence—trafficking is an
                                                  immense problem for developed and developing nations alike.”
                                                                   – Anne T. Gallagher, Officer of the Order of Australia,
                                              former Advisor on Trafficking to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2013




      28
DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY




                                                                                                                           DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
“When I had sex with him, I felt empty inside. I hurt and I felt very weak. It was very
  difficult. I thought about why I was doing this and why my mom did this to me. ”
                                   – “Jorani,” human trafficking survivor
                           whose mother sold her into prostitution, Cambodia, 2013

What Is Trafficking In Persons?
“Trafficking in persons” and “human trafficking” have been used as umbrella terms for the act of recruiting,
harboring, transporting, providing, or obtaining a person for compelled labor or commercial sex acts through
the use of force, fraud, or coercion. The Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA) of 2000 (Pub. L. 106-386),
as amended, and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (the
Palermo Protocol), describe this compelled service using a number of different terms, including involuntary
servitude, slavery or practices similar to slavery, debt bondage, and forced labor.

Human trafficking can include, but does not require, movement. People may be considered trafficking
victims regardless of whether they were born into a state of servitude, were transported to the exploitative
situation, previously consented to work for a trafficker, or participated in a crime as a direct result of being
trafficked. At the heart of this phenomenon is the traffickers’ goal of exploiting and enslaving their victims
and the myriad coercive and deceptive practices they use to do so.


The Face of Modern Slavery

Sex Trafficking
When an adult engages in a commercial sex act, such as prostitution, as the result of force, threats of force, fraud,
coercion or any combination of such means, that person is a victim of trafficking. Under such circumstances,
perpetrators involved in recruiting, harboring, enticing, transporting, providing, obtaining, or maintaining
a person for that purpose are guilty of sex trafficking
of an adult. Sex trafficking also may occur within
debt bondage, as individuals are forced to continue
in prostitution through the use of unlawful “debt,”             Pakistan – United
purportedly incurred through their transportation,
recruitment, or even their crude “sale”—which                   Arab Emirates
exploiters insist they must pay off before they can be
free. An adult’s consent to participate in prostitution      Mariam and her 16-year-old daughter Fatima were
is not legally determinative: if one is thereafter held      promised jobs at a beauty salon in the United Arab
in service through psychological manipulation or             Emirates. On their flight from Pakistan, a friendly man
physical force, he or she is a trafficking victim and        gave Mariam his number just in case she needed any
should receive benefits outlined in the Palermo              help while there. Mariam and Fatima were picked
                                                             up at the airport by an acquaintance of the person
Protocol and applicable domestic laws.
                                                                who paid for their flights and promised them jobs.
                                                                She took their passports. Then, instead of going to a
                                                                salon, the mother and daughter were made to engage
Child Sex Trafficking                                           in prostitution to pay for their plane tickets. Mariam
When a child (under 18 years of age) is recruited,              had to see her daughter cry every time a client left her
enticed, harbored, transported, provided, obtained, or          room. When she could, Mariam called the man from
maintained to perform a commercial sex act, proving             her flight and confided in him; he encouraged her to
force, fraud, or coercion is not necessary for the offense      contact the police. They convinced their captor that
to be characterized as human trafficking. There are no          they needed to go to the market, but instead found a
exceptions to this rule: no cultural or socioeconomic           taxi and went to the police. During the investigation,
                                                                the police uncovered other victims, also lured with
rationalizations alter the fact that children who are
                                                                promises of jobs in a beauty salon.
prostituted are trafficking victims.


                                                                                                                                29
                                     Media Best Practices
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT


                                     A
                                              sk most people where their information about human trafficking comes from, and the answer is often
                                              “I heard about it on the news.” Unsurprisingly, the media play an enormous role shaping perceptions
                                              and guiding the public conversation about this crime. How the media reports on human trafficking
                                     is just as important as what is being reported, and the overall impact of these stories is reflected in the way
                                     the public, politicians, law enforcement, and even other media outlets understand the issue.

                                     In recent years, a number of reports about trafficking have relied on misinformation and outdated statistics,
                                     blamed or exploited victims, and conflated terminology. Instead of shining a brighter light on this problem,
                                     such reports add confusion to a crime that is already underreported and often misunderstood by the public.
                                     As the issue of human trafficking begins to enter the public consciousness, members of the media have a
                                     responsibility to report thoroughly and responsibly, and to protect those who have already been victimized.

                                     A few promising practices can keep journalists on the right track:

                                       ➤➤   L anguage matters. Is there a difference between survivor and victim? Prostitution and sex
                                             trafficking? Human smuggling and human trafficking? The conflation of terms, as well as the failure
                                             to use the correct definition to describe human trafficking, can confuse and mislead audiences.
                                             Human trafficking is a complex crime that many communities are still trying to understand, and
                                             using outdated terms or incorrect definitions only weakens understanding of the issue. Become
                                             familiar with the trafficking definitions of international law, found in the Palermo Protocol to the United
                                             Nations Transnational Organized Crime Convention, as well as other related terms that are commonly used.
                                       ➤➤   D angers of re-victimization. Photos or names of human trafficking victims should not be
                                            published without their consent, and journalists should not speak with a minor without a victim
                                            specialist, parent, or guardian present. Human trafficking cases often involve complex safety
                                            concerns that could be exacerbated by a published story, or if a victim or survivor has not fully
                                            healed, a published story may reactivate trauma or shame years later. Ensure that, before a victim of
                                            human trafficking agrees to share his or her story, he or she understands that once the story is published, it
                                            will be available to the public at large.
                                       ➤➤    urvivor stories. Although interviewing survivors may be the key to understanding human trafficking,
                                            S
                                            there are optimal ways to approach survivors and learn about their experiences. Reporters should
                                            invest time engaging service providers and NGOs that work with survivors to learn and understand
                                            the best possible approaches. Be flexible, do not make demands, and do not expect the survivor to tell
                                            you his or her story in one sitting. Spend time with survivors, get to know them as people, and follow up
                                            even after the story is complete.
                                       ➤➤   Half the story. When media report on only one type of human trafficking, the public is left with
                                            only part of the story. Human trafficking includes sex trafficking, child sex trafficking, forced labor,
                                            bonded labor, involuntary domestic servitude, and debt bondage. Strengthen the public’s understanding
                                            of human trafficking and the full scope of the crime.
                                       ➤➤    umbers game. Reporters often lead with numbers, but reliable statistics related to human
                                            N
                                            trafficking are difficult to find. Human trafficking is a clandestine crime and few victims and survivors
                                            come forward for fear of retaliation, shame, or lack of understanding of what is happening to them.
                                            Numbers are not always the story. Pursue individual stories of survival, new government initiatives, or
                                            innovative research efforts until better data are available.
                                       ➤➤    uman trafficking happens. Simply reporting that human trafficking occurs is not a story.
                                            H
                                            Human trafficking happens in every country in the world. Go deeper and find out who are the most
                                            vulnerable to victimization, what kind of help is offered for survivors, and what your community is doing
                                            to eradicate this problem.
                                       ➤➤   Advocacy journalism. Human trafficking is a popular topic for journalists hoping to make a
                                            social impact. Journalists may befriend survivors, earn their trust, and in some cases help remove
                                            them from a harmful situation. This is typically not appropriate. Everyone should do their part
                                            to help eradicate this crime, but victim assistance should be handled by accredited organizations.
                                            “Rescuing” a victim is not a means to a story. Instead, connect a victim to a reputable service provider
                                            to ensure they are safe and their needs are met.



                    30
                                                                                                                  DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
Above: Police work to reunite families with 39 children who were rescued in a raid on an embroidery factory.
Such raids can be traumatic for human trafficking victims, as their abusers have often filled them with fear of
authorities through psychological manipulation.
Below: A group of boys wait to be processed after a police raid on garment factories in New Delhi, India.
Anti-Trafficking Police and NGOs helped remove 26 children from the factories, but it is feared that many
more were not rescued.




                                                                                                                       31
                                     Human Trafficking and the Demand
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     for Organs


                                     M
                                              ore than 114,000 organ transplants are reportedly performed every year around the world. These
                                              operations satisfy less than an estimated 10 percent of the global need for organs such as kidneys,
                                              livers, hearts, lungs, and pancreases. One third of these operations include kidneys and livers
                                     from living donors. The shortage of human organs, coupled with the desperation experienced by patients
                                     in need of transplants, has created an illicit market for organs.

                                     Governments, the medical community, and international organizations, such as the World Health
                                     Organization, are addressing the illicit sale and purchase of organs through the adoption of regulations,
                                     laws, codes of conduct, awareness campaigns, and mechanisms to improve traceability of organs, as well as
                                     to protect the health and safety of all participants. Many countries have also criminalized the buying and
                                     selling of human organs. Unscrupulous individuals seeking to profit from this shortage, however, prey on
                                     disadvantaged persons, frequently adult male laborers from less-developed countries. These living donors
                                     are often paid a fraction of what they were promised, are not able to return to work due to poor health
                                     outcomes resulting from their surgeries, and have little hope of being compensated for their damages.
                                     This practice is exploitative and unethical, and often illegal under local law. Sometimes it also involves
                                     trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal.


                                                              But what makes an illegal organ trade
                                                                 also a human trafficking crime?

                                     The sale and purchase of organs themselves, while a crime in many countries, does not per se constitute
                                     human trafficking. The crime of trafficking in persons requires the recruitment, transport, or harboring of
                                     a person for organ removal through coercive means, including the “abuse of a position of vulnerability.”
                                     Cases in which organs are donated from deceased donors who have died of natural causes do not involve
                                     human trafficking.

                                     Some advocates have taken the position that when economically disadvantaged donors enter into agreements
                                     for organ removal in exchange for money, they invariably become trafficking victims because there is “an
                                     abuse of a position of vulnerability.” Abuse of a position of vulnerability is one of the “means” under the
                                     Palermo Protocol definition of trafficking in persons. Thus, if a person who is in a position of vulnerability
                                     is recruited by another who abuses that position by falsely promising payment and health care benefits
                                     in exchange for a kidney, the recruiter may well have engaged in trafficking in persons for the purpose of
                                     organ removal. The UN’s Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) states in its Guidance Note on “abuse of a
                                     position of vulnerability” as a means of trafficking in persons that the abuse of vulnerability occurs when
                                     “an individual’s personal, situational, or circumstantial vulnerability is intentionally used or otherwise
                                     taken advantage of such that the person believes that submitting to the will of the abuser is the only real
                                     and acceptable option available to him or her, and that belief is reasonable in light of the victim’s situation.”
                                     Thus, poverty alone—without abuse of that vulnerability in a manner to make a victim’s submission to
                                     exploitation the “only real and acceptable option”—is not enough to support a trafficking case, whether
                                     the exploitation is sexual exploitation, forced labor, or the removal of organs.




        32
The use of children in the commercial sex trade is prohibited both under U.S. law and by statute in most




                                                                                                                    DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
countries around the world. Sex trafficking has devastating consequences for minors, including long-lasting
physical and psychological trauma, disease (including HIV/AIDS), drug addiction, unwanted pregnancy,
malnutrition, social ostracism, and even death.


Forced Labor
Forced labor, sometimes also referred to as labor trafficking, encompasses the range of activities—recruiting,
harboring, transporting, providing, or obtaining—involved when a person uses force or physical threats,
psychological coercion, abuse of the legal process, deception, or other coercive means to compel someone to
work. Once a person’s labor is exploited by such means, the person’s prior consent to work for an employer
is legally irrelevant: the employer is a trafficker and the employee is a trafficking victim. Migrants are
particularly vulnerable to this form of human trafficking, but individuals also may be forced into labor
in their own countries. Female victims of forced or bonded labor, especially women and girls in domestic
servitude, are often sexually exploited as well.


Bonded Labor or Debt Bondage
One form of coercion is the use of a bond or debt. U.S. law prohibits the use of a debt or other threats of
financial harm as a form of coercion and the Palermo Protocol requires states to criminalize threats and
other forms of coercion for the purpose of forced labor or services or practices similar to slavery or servitude.
Some workers inherit debt; for example, in South Asia it is estimated that there are millions of trafficking
victims working to pay off their ancestors’ debts. Others fall victim to traffickers or recruiters who unlawfully
exploit an initial debt assumed as a term of employment.

Debts taken on by migrant laborers in their countries of origin, often with the support of labor agencies and
employers in the destination country, can also contribute to a situation of debt bondage. Such circumstances
may occur in the context of employment-based temporary work programs in which a worker’s legal status
in the destination country is tied to the employer and workers fear seeking redress.


Young Chinese children
work side by side with
their parents in hazardous
conditions in a leather
factory. In recent years,
reports have indicated a
connection between luxury
goods, counterfeiting, and
forced labor.




                                                                                                                         33
                                                                                                  Involuntary Domestic Servitude
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                       Burma – Thailand                                           I nvoluntary domestic servitude is a form of human
                                                                                                   trafficking found in unique circumstances—work in a
                                                                                                   private residence—that create unique vulnerabilities
                                       Trusting his recruiters, Myo believed he was leaving
                                       his home in Burma to work in a pineapple factory in
                                                                                                   for victims. It is a crime where domestic workers are
                                       Thailand. Yet, when he arrived, he was sold to a boat       not free to leave their employment and are often
                                       captain for the equivalent of approximately $430. He        abused and underpaid. Many domestic workers
                                       was held on the boat for 10 months, forced to work,         do not receive the basic benefits and protections
                                       and beaten regularly. On the rare occasion that the         commonly extended to other groups of workers—
                                       boat docked at port, the officers bribed local police to    things as simple as a day off. Moreover, their ability
                                       allow them to keep the fishermen on the boat rather         to move freely is often limited, and employment
                                       than risking them escaping if they were allowed to
                                       set foot on shore. Myo was finally able to escape and
                                                                                                   in private homes increases their vulnerability and
                                       sought refuge in a temple. He continues to struggle         isolation. Authorities cannot inspect homes as easily
                                       with deafness, having had his head and ear smashed          as formal workplaces, and in many cases do not have
                                       into a block of ice on the fishing boat.                    the mandate or capacity to do so. Domestic workers,
                                                                                                   especially women, confront various forms of abuse,
                                                                                                   harassment, and exploitation, including sexual and
                                                                                                   gender-based violence. These issues, taken together,
                                                                                                   may be symptoms of a situation of domestic servitude.


                                     Forced Child Labor
                                     Although children may legally engage in certain forms of work, children can also be found in situations
                                     of forced labor. A child can be a victim of human trafficking regardless of the location of that exploitation.
                                     Some indicators of possible forced labor of a child include situations in which the child appears to be in the
                                     custody of a non-family member who requires the child to perform work that financially benefits someone
                                     outside the child’s family and does not offer the child the option of leaving. When the victim of forced labor
                                     is a child, the crime is still one of trafficking. Anti-trafficking responses should supplement, not replace,
                                     traditional actions against child labor, such as remediation and education. When children are compelled
                                     to work, their abusers should not be able to escape criminal punishment by taking weaker administrative
                                     responses to child labor practices.


                                     Unlawful Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers
                                     Child soldiering is a manifestation of human trafficking when it involves the unlawful recruitment or use of
                                     children—through force, fraud, or coercion—by armed forces as combatants or other forms of labor. Some
                                     child soldiers are also sexually exploited by members of armed groups. Perpetrators may be government
                                     armed forces, paramilitary organizations, or rebel groups. Many children are forcibly abducted to be used
                                     as combatants. Others are unlawfully made to work as porters, cooks, guards, servants, messengers, or spies.
                                     Young girls can be forced to marry or have sex with male combatants. Both male and female child soldiers
                                     are often sexually abused and are at high risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases.




                                           “       I worked for him for a few months, cleaning and cooking, but he never
                                                     paid me. . . . When I demanded my overdue money, he said I would
                                                     have to have sex with him, then he would give me the money, but I
                                                   refused so he beat me. After this I was too scared to ask for my money,
                                                                          so I did whatever he asked. ”
                                                                      “Christine,” human trafficking survivor who migrated from
                                                                          Zimbabwe to South Africa looking for work, 2014




      34
Victims’ Consent




                                                                                                                    DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
A
        common perception of a trafficking victim is of a woman kidnapped, made to cross a border, forced
        into sexual slavery, and physically beaten. The reality of human trafficking is frequently much more
        subtle. Vulnerable individuals may be aware of, and initially agree to, poor working conditions or
the basic duties of the job that underlies their exploitation. Victims may sign contracts and thereby initially
agree to work for a certain employer, but later find that they were deceived and cannot leave the job because
of threats against their families or overwhelming debts owed to the recruitment agency that arranged the
employment.

On the issue of victims’ consent to exploitation, the Palermo Protocol is clear: if any coercive means have been
used, a victim’s consent “shall be irrelevant.” This means that a man who has signed a contract to work in a
factory, but who is later forced to work through threats or physical abuse, is a trafficking victim regardless of
his agreement to work in that factory. Similarly, a woman who has voluntarily traveled to a country knowing
that she would engage in prostitution is also a trafficking victim if, subsequently, her exploiters use any
form of coercion to require her to engage in prostitution for their benefit. If a state’s laws conform to the
Palermo Protocol requirements, a trafficker would not be able to successfully defend a trafficking charge by
presenting evidence that a victim previously engaged in prostitution, knew the purpose of travel, or in any
other way consented or agreed to work for someone who subsequently used coercion to exploit the victim.

With regard to children, the Palermo Protocol provides that proof of coercive means is not relevant. Thus,
a child is considered to be a victim of human trafficking simply if she or he is subjected to forced labor or
prostitution by a third party, regardless of whether any form of coercion was used at any stage in the process.

Even if the legal concept of consent is clear, its
application is more complex in practice, especially
when the victim is an adult. Many countries
struggle with uniform application of this
provision. In some countries, courts have thrown
out trafficking cases when prosecutors have been
unable to prove that the victims were coerced at
the outset of recruitment. For example, in one
European country, a judge rejected trafficking
charges in a case where a mentally disabled man
was forced to pick berries. Despite clear use of
force to compel labor—the victim was dragged
back to the labor camp with a noose around his
neck—the court held that lack of proof of coercion
from the very beginning of recruitment nullified
the trafficking. In other countries, defense
attorneys have made arguments that victims’
prior prostitution proves that they had not been
forced to engage in prostitution. More subtly,
consent may influence whether prosecutors
bring trafficking cases at all. Cases without the Construction in preparation for the 2022 FIFA World Cup
“paradigmatic victim” may prove more difficult has already begun, and reports of abuse have received
to win because there is a risk that the judge or global attention. Initial consent of a construction worker to
jury will view the victim as a criminal rather than accept a tough job in a harsh environment does not waive
a victim. To be successful, these cases require his or her right to work free from abuse. When an employer
both strong legal presentations and compelling or labor recruiter deceives workers about the terms of
evidence in addition to victim testimony. Efforts employment, withholds their passports, holds them in
to further address the challenging issue of consent brutal conditions, and exploits their labor, the workers are
                                                    victims of trafficking.
would not only help ensure that victims’ rights
are protected, but would also align prosecutions with the Palermo Protocol requirements. Such efforts might
include the explicit incorporation of the Palermo Protocol provision on consent into domestic criminal law
and the training of investigators and prosecutors. It is helpful to clarify for fact finders—whether they are
judges or juries—that consent cannot be a valid defense to the charge of trafficking and to educate them on
the various forms that apparent consent may take (e.g., contracts, failure to leave a situation of exploitation,
or victims who do not self-identify as victims). Similarly, investigators can learn that investigations do not
need to stop just because a victim had expressed a form of consent.
                                                                                                                         35
                                     Vulnerability of Indigenous Persons to
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     human Trafficking

                                     T
                                         he United Nations estimates there are more than 370 million indigenous people worldwide. At times,
                                         they are described as aboriginal: members of a tribe, or members of a specific group. While there is no
                                         internationally accepted definition of “indigenous,” the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous
                                     Issues identifies several key factors to facilitate international understanding of the term:

                                       ➤➤   Self-identification of indigenous peoples at an individual and community level;
                                       ➤➤   Historical continuity with pre-colonial and/or pre-settler societies;
                                       ➤➤   Strong link to territories and surrounding natural resources;
                                       ➤➤   Distinct social, economic, or political systems;
                                       ➤➤   Distinct language, culture, and beliefs;
                                       ➤➤   Membership in non-dominant groups of society; and/or
                                       ➤➤   Resolve to maintain and reproduce their ancestral environments and
                                            system as distinctive peoples and communities.


                                     Worldwide, indigenous persons are often economically and politically marginalized and are disproportionately
                                     affected by environmental degradation and armed conflict. They may lack citizenship and access to basic
                                     services, sometimes including education. These factors make indigenous peoples particularly vulnerable to
                                     both sex trafficking and forced labor. For example, children from hill tribes in northern Thailand seeking
                                     employment opportunities have been found in commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking,
                                     in bars in major cities within the country. In North America, government officials and NGOs alike have
                                     identified aboriginal Canadian and American Indian women and girls as particularly vulnerable to sex
                                     trafficking. In Latin America, members of indigenous communities are often more vulnerable to both sex and
                                     labor trafficking than other segments of local society; in both Peru and Colombia, they have been forcibly
                                     recruited by illegal armed groups. In remote areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, members of
                                     Batwa, or pygmy groups, are subjected to conditions of forced labor in agriculture, mining, mechanics, and
                                     domestic service. San women and boys in Namibia are exploited in domestic servitude and forced cattle
                                     herding, while San girls are vulnerable to sex trafficking.

                                     Combating the trafficking of indigenous persons requires prosecution, protection, and prevention efforts
                                     that are culturally-sensitive and collaborative—efforts that also empower indigenous groups to identify
                                     and respond to forced labor and sex trafficking within their communities. For example, the government
                                     of the Canadian province of British Columbia and NGOs have partnered with aboriginal communities to
                                     strengthen their collective capacity to effectively work with trafficking victims by incorporating community
                                     traditions and rituals into victim protection efforts, such as use of the medicine wheel—a diverse indigenous
                                     tradition with spiritual and healing purposes.



                                     Below: Ashaninka Indian girls go about daily life in the world’s top coca-growing valley. The Ashaninka are the
                                     largest indigenous group in the Amazon region of Peru, and some have been kidnapped or forcibly recruited to
                                     serve as combatants in the illicit narcotics trade by the terrorist group Sendero Luminoso.




      36
“    Many children, like myself, come from various traumas previously to entering




                                                                                                                          DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
   into foster care, and many times, are further exposed to trauma throughout their
 experience in the foster care system. Although there are many people who uplift the
system for its successes, there are many elements within the experience of foster care
  that make youth more susceptible to being victimized. Youth within the system are
more vulnerable to becoming sexually exploited because youth accept and normalize
     the experience of being used as an object of financial gain by people who are
 supposed to care for us, we experience various people who control our lives, and we
        lack the opportunity to gain meaningful relationships and attachments. ”
                                   – Withelma “T” Ortiz Walker Pettigrew




Featured in the 2013 TIP Report, survivor and advocate Withelma “T” Ortiz Walker Pettigrew has become an
outspoken advocate raising awareness about sex trafficking in the United States. This year, she was named one
of TIME Magazine’s “100 Most Influential People.”


  Methodology
  The U.S. Department of State prepared this Report
                                                                Philippines –
  using information from U.S. embassies, government
  officials, non-governmental and international
                                                                Australia
  organizations, published reports, news articles,
  academic studies, research trips to every region of the       With dreams of successful boxing careers, Czar and
                                                                three of his friends fell prey to three Australians who
  world, and information submitted to tipreport@state.          helped them procure temporary sports visas and paid
  gov. This email address provides a means by which             for their travel from the Philippines to Sydney. Upon
  organizations and individuals can share information           arriving in Australia, the men were already in debt to
  with the Department of State on government progress           their captors, who confiscated their passports and
  in addressing trafficking.                                    forced them into unpaid domestic labor as “houseboys.”
                                                                Rather than making their way in the boxing industry,
  U.S. diplomatic posts and domestic agencies reported          they were forced to live in an uninsulated garage
  on the trafficking situation and governmental action          with mere table scraps for meals. After three months,
  to fight trafficking based on thorough research that          Czar finally entered a boxing match, and won the
                                                                equivalent of approximately $3,500, but the money
  included meetings with a wide variety of government           was taken by his captor. Shortly thereafter, Czar ran
  officials, local and international NGO representatives,       away and escaped. One of his friends also escaped,
  officials of international organizations, journalists,        and went to the police. An investigation was opened
  academics, and survivors. U.S. missions overseas are          into their captors on counts of exploitation and human
  dedicated to covering human trafficking issues. The           trafficking.
  2014 TIP Report covers government efforts undertaken
  from April 1, 2013 through March 31, 2014.

                                                                                                                              37
                                     CHILD SOLDIERS
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                          Four boys, as young as 12 and 14 years old, fight for a rebel group in northern Mali. International
                                          observers report that extremist rebel groups have kidnapped, recruited, and paid for large numbers of
                                          child soldiers in the country. Children in conflict zones are especially vulnerable to being sold to armed
                                          groups, and are often forced to participate in armed conflict.




                                       T
                                            he Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008 (CSPA) was signed into law on December 23, 2008 (Title IV
                                            of Pub. L. 110-457), and took effect on June 21, 2009. The CSPA requires publication in the annual
                                            TIP Report of a list of foreign governments identified during the previous year as having governmental
                                       armed forces or government-supported armed groups that recruit and use child soldiers, as defined in the
                                       Act. These determinations cover the reporting period beginning April 1, 2013 and ending March 31, 2014.

                                       For the purpose of the CSPA, and generally consistent with the provisions of the Optional Protocol to
                                       the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the term
                                       “child soldier” means:

                                       (i) a ny person under 18 years of age who takes a direct part in hostilities as a member of governmental
                                            armed forces;
                                       (ii) a ny person under 18 years of age who has been compulsorily recruited into governmental armed
                                            forces;
                                       (iii) a ny person under 15 years of age who has been voluntarily recruited into governmental armed
                                              forces; or
                                       (iv) a ny person under 18 years of age who has been recruited or used in hostilities by armed forces
                                             distinct from the armed forces of a state.

                                     The term “child soldier” includes any person described in clauses (ii), (iii), or (iv) who is serving in any
                                     capacity, including in a support role such as a “cook, porter, messenger, medic, guard, or sex slave.”

                                     Governments identified on the list are subject to restrictions, in the following fiscal year, on certain security
                                     assistance and commercial licensing of military equipment. The CSPA, as amended, prohibits assistance to

      38
governments that are identified in the list under the following authorities: International Military Education




                                                                                                                  DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
and Training, Foreign Military Financing, Excess Defense Articles, and Peacekeeping Operations, with
exceptions for some programs undertaken pursuant to the Peacekeeping Operations authority. The CSPA also
prohibits the issuance of licenses for direct commercial sales of military equipment to such governments.
Beginning October 1, 2014 and effective throughout Fiscal Year 2015, these restrictions will apply to the
listed countries, absent a presidential national interest waiver, applicable exception, or reinstatement of
assistance pursuant to the terms of the CSPA. The determination to include a government in the CSPA
list is informed by a range of sources, including first-hand observation by U.S. government personnel and
research and credible reporting from various United Nations entities, international organizations, local and
international NGOs, and international media outlets.

The 2014 CSPA List includes governments in the following countries:

  1.   Burma
  2.   Central African Republic
  3.   Democratic Republic of the Congo
  4.   Rwanda
  5.   Somalia
  6.   South Sudan
  7.   Sudan
  8.   Syria
  9.   Yemen


Special Court of Sierra Leone: Accountability at the Highest Level for
Child Soldiering Offenses
The Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL) was established in 2002 by agreement between the Government
of the Republic of Sierra Leone and the United Nations to try those most responsible for crimes against
humanity, war crimes, and other serious violations of international humanitarian law, including conscripting
or recruiting children under the age of 15 years, committed in the civil war. Since its inception, the Special
Court has handed down several important decisions in cases involving allegations related to the conscripting
or enlisting of children under the age of 15 years into armed forces or armed groups. During Sierra Leone’s
civil war, all parties to the conflict recruited and used child soldiers. Children were forced to fight, commit
atrocities, and were often sexually abused. Former Liberian President Charles Taylor was convicted by the
SCSL on 11 counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes for his role in supporting armed groups,
including the Revolutionary United Front, in the planning and commission of crimes committed during
the conflict. In a landmark 2004 decision, the Court held that individual criminal responsibility for the
crime of recruiting children under the age of 15 years had crystallized as customary international law
prior to November 1996. In June 2007, the Court delivered the first judgment of an international or mixed
tribunal convicting persons of conscripting or enlisting children under the age of 15 years into armed forces
or using them to participate actively in hostilities.

In 2013, the Special Court reached another milestone by upholding the conviction of former Liberian
President Charles Taylor. The judgment marked the first time a former head of state had been convicted
in an international or hybrid court of violations of international law. Taylor was convicted, among other
charges, of aiding and abetting sexual slavery and conscription of child soldiers. After more than a decade
of working toward accountability for crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in Sierra Leone,
the SCSL transitioned on December 31, 2013, to a successor mechanism, the Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone, which will continue to provide a variety of ongoing functions, including witness protection
services and management of convicted detainees. Its work stands for the proposition that the international
community can achieve justice and accountability for crimes committed, even by proxy, against the most
vulnerable—children in armed conflict.




                                                                                                                      39
                                     Tier Placement
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     The Department places each country in the 2014 TIP            Mexico –
                                     Report onto one of four tiers, as mandated by the
                                     TVPA. This placement is based more on the extent of           United States
                                     government action to combat trafficking than on the size
                                     of the country’s problem. The analyses are based on the       Flor Molina was a hard worker and a good seamstress,
                                     extent of governments’ efforts to reach compliance with       working two jobs in Mexico to support her three
                                     the TVPA’s minimum standards for the elimination of           young children. When her sewing teacher told her
                                                                                                   about a sewing job in the United States, she thought
                                     human trafficking (see page 425), which are generally
                                                                                                   it was a good opportunity. Once they arrived at the
                                     consistent with the Palermo Protocol.                         border, the woman who arranged their travel took
                                                                                                   Flor’s identification documents and clothes, “for
                                     While Tier 1 is the highest ranking, it does not mean         safekeeping.” She and her teacher were taken to a
                                     that a country has no human trafficking problem or            sewing factory and immediately began working. Beaten
                                     that it is doing enough to address the problem. Rather,       and prohibited from leaving the factory, Flor began
                                     a Tier 1 ranking indicates that a government has              her days at 4:00 in the morning; she not only worked
                                     acknowledged the existence of human trafficking, has          as a seamstress, but had to clean the factory after
                                     made efforts to address the problem, and meets the            the other workers went home. After 40 days, she was
                                                                                                   allowed to leave to attend church, where she was able
                                     TVPA’s minimum standards. Each year, governments
                                                                                                   to get help. With the help of a local NGO, Flor was able
                                     need to demonstrate appreciable progress in combating         to break free. Now, she is a leader in a U.S. national
                                     trafficking to maintain a Tier 1 ranking. Indeed, Tier        survivors’ caucus, and advocates for victims’ rights
                                     1 represents a responsibility rather than a reprieve.         and supply chain transparency.
                                     A country is never finished with the job of fighting
                                     trafficking.

                                     Tier rankings and narratives in the 2014 TIP Report reflect an assessment of the following:

                                     »»   e nactment of laws prohibiting severe forms of trafficking in persons, as defined by the TVPA, and
                                           provision of criminal punishments for trafficking offenses;
                                     »»   c riminal penalties prescribed for human trafficking offenses with a maximum of at least four years’
                                          deprivation of liberty, or a more severe penalty;
                                     »»   implementation of human trafficking laws through vigorous prosecution of the prevalent forms of
                                          trafficking in the country and sentencing of offenders;
                                     »»   proactive victim identification measures with systematic procedures to guide law enforcement and
                                          other government-supported front-line responders in the process of victim identification;
                                     »»   government funding and partnerships with NGOs to provide victims with access to primary health
                                          care, counseling, and shelter, allowing them to recount their trafficking experiences to trained
                                           social counselors and law enforcement in an environment of minimal pressure;
                                     »»   v ictim protection efforts that include access to services and shelter without detention and with
                                           legal alternatives to removal to countries in which victims would face retribution or hardship;
                                     »»   t he extent to which a government ensures victims are provided with legal and other assistance and
                                           that, consistent with domestic law, proceedings are not prejudicial to victims’ rights, dignity, or
                                           psychological well-being;
                                     »»   t he extent to which a government ensures the safe, humane, and to the extent possible, voluntary
                                          repatriation and reintegration of victims; and
                                     »»   governmental measures to prevent human trafficking, including efforts to curb practices identified
                                          as contributing factors to human trafficking, such as employers’ confiscation of foreign workers’
                                           passports and allowing labor recruiters to charge prospective migrants excessive fees.

                                     Tier rankings and narratives are NOT affected by the following:

                                     »»   e fforts, however laudable, undertaken exclusively by non-governmental actors in the country;
                                     »»   g eneral public awareness events—government-sponsored or otherwise—lacking concrete ties to the
                                           prosecution of traffickers, protection of victims, or prevention of trafficking; and
                                     »»   broad-based law enforcement or developmental initiatives.


        40
“ This entire village is in debt to the land




                                                                                                                      DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
owner. I took a loan of Rs 10,000 ($181) for
 medical treatment. Our wage is so small,
       we can never repay the loans. ”
               – “Amit,” male, age 33, 2014




    The 35-year-old woman above is in debt to her employer for the equivalent of approximately $2,500 and must
    work in his brick factory to pay the debt. The 27-year-old woman below owes her employer the equivalent of
    approximately $3,000. Both of these Pakistani women are trapped in debt bondage. Unscrupulous recruiters
    exploit a vulnerability—sometimes caused by natural disaster or sickness—trapping their victims in debt bondage
    for years to repay the initial loan.




                                                                                                                        41
     2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




42
A Guide to the Tiers




                                                                                                                         DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
Tier 1
Countries whose governments fully comply with the TVPA’s minimum standards for the elimination
of trafficking.


Tier 2
Countries whose governments do not fully comply with the TVPA’s minimum standards but are making
significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance with those standards.

Tier 2 Watch List
Countries whose governments do not fully comply with the TVPA’s minimum standards, but are making
significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance with those standards, and for which:

  a) 	the absolute number of victims of severe forms of trafficking is very significant or is significantly
       increasing;

  b) 	there is a failure to provide evidence of increasing efforts to combat severe forms of trafficking in
       persons from the previous year, including increased investigations, prosecution, and convictions of
       trafficking crimes, increased assistance to victims, and decreasing evidence of complicity in severe
       forms of trafficking by government officials; or

  c) 	the determination that a country is making significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with
       minimum standards was based on commitments by the country to take additional steps over the
      next year.

Tier 3
Countries whose governments do not fully comply with the TVPA’s minimum standards and are not making
significant efforts to do so.

The TVPA lists additional factors to determine whether a country should be on Tier 2 (or Tier 2 Watch List)
versus Tier 3. First is the extent to which the country is a country of origin, transit, or destination for severe
forms of trafficking. Second is the extent to which the country’s government does not comply with the TVPA’s
minimum standards and, in particular, the extent to which officials or government employees have been
complicit in severe forms of trafficking. And the third factor is the reasonable measures that the government
would need to undertake to be in compliance with the minimum standards in light of the government’s
resources and capabilities to address and eliminate severe forms of trafficking in persons.

A 2008 amendment to the TVPA provides that any
country that has been ranked Tier 2 Watch List for two
consecutive years and that would otherwise be ranked           India
Tier 2 Watch List for the next year will instead be ranked
Tier 3 in that third year. This automatic downgrade            Ajay was only 15 when he was abducted from a city
provision came into effect for the first time in the 2013      playground one evening and sold to a rich sugarcane
Report. The Secretary of State is authorized to waive          farmer, far from home. Upon waking the next morning—
the automatic downgrade based on credible evidence             and until he was able to escape about a year later—Ajay
that a waiver is justified because the government has          endured back-breaking work cleaning livestock pens
a written plan that, if implemented, would constitute          and processing sugarcane. He was forced to work with
making significant efforts to comply with the TVPA’s           little food and less sleep, even after he lost a finger
                                                               while cutting cane. Escape seemed inconceivable to
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking           him and the other children on the farm, until one day
and is devoting sufficient resources to implement the          his owner sent Ajay to run an errand. Ajay seized the
plan. The Secretary can only issue this waiver for two         chance to escape and began the long journey home
consecutive years. After the third year, a country must        to his family. His family celebrated his return—a year
either go up to Tier 2 or down to Tier 3. Governments          after he was abducted—and while they asked the police
subject to the automatic downgrade provision are               to investigate what happened to Ajay, many children
noted as such in the country narratives.                       continue to be held in forced labor on sugarcane farms
                                                               and elsewhere.



                                                                                                                              43
                                                                                                  Penalties for Tier 3 Countries
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                       Vietnam                                                    Pursuant to the TVPA, governments of countries
                                                                                                  on Tier 3 may be subject to certain restrictions on
                                       Needing to support their families, teenagers Dung and      bilateral assistance, whereby the U.S. government
                                       Chien dropped out of school and went to work as gold       may withhold or withdraw non-humanitarian, non-
                                       miners. The boys were forced to work underground           trade-related foreign assistance. In addition, certain
                                       around the clock, under constant surveillance, and
                                                                                                  countries on Tier 3 may not receive funding for
                                       controlled by threats. They were told they would not
                                       get paid until they had worked for six months. Racked      government employees’ participation in educational
                                       with untreated malaria and malnourished, Dung and          and cultural exchange programs. Consistent with
                                       Chien organized an escape attempt with some of the         the TVPA, governments subject to restrictions would
                                       other boys being held in the mines, only to be caught      also face U.S. opposition to assistance (except for
                                       and beaten by the foreman. They were able to finally       humanitarian, trade-related, and certain development-
                                       escape with the help of local villagers, who fed them      related assistance) from international financial
                                       as they hid from the bosses in the jungle. With the help
                                                                                                  institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund
                                       of a local child support center, the boys are looking
                                       forward to being reunited with their families.             and the World Bank.

                                                                                            Imposed restrictions will take effect upon the
                                                                                            beginning of the U.S. government’s next Fiscal Year—
                                     October 1, 2014—however, all or part of the TVPA’s restrictions can be waived if the President determines
                                     that the provision of such assistance to the government would promote the purposes of the statute or is
                                     otherwise in the United States’ national interest. The TVPA also provides for a waiver of restrictions if
                                     necessary to avoid significant adverse effects on vulnerable populations, including women and children.

                                     No tier ranking is permanent. Every country, including the United States, can do more. All countries must
                                     maintain and increase efforts to combat trafficking.




                                     “  Whether it comes in the form of a young girl trapped in a brothel, a woman
                                     enslaved as a domestic worker, a boy forced to sell himself on the street, or a man
                                     abused on a fishing boat, the victims of this crime have been robbed of the right to
                                                          lead the lives they choose for themselves. ”
                                                                             – Secretary of State John F. Kerry, 2014


                                     State troopers in New Jersey receive assignments for the security posts for the 2014 Super Bowl. New
                                     Jersey officials trained law enforcement, airport employees, and hospitality personnel about how to identify
                                     victims of sex trafficking before the event.




      44
      GLOBAL LAW ENFORCEMENT DATA




                                                                                                                                                               DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
      The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) of 2003 added to the original law a new
      requirement that foreign governments provide the Department of State with data on trafficking investigations,
      prosecutions, convictions, and sentences in order to be considered in full compliance with the TVPA’s
      minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking (Tier 1). The 2004 TIP Report collected this data for
      the first time. The 2007 TIP Report showed for the first time a breakout of the number of total prosecutions
      and convictions that related to labor trafficking, placed in parentheses.

                                                                                                 VICTIMS                    NEW OR AMENDED
          YEAR            PROSECUTIONS CONVICTIONS
                                                                                                IDENTIFIED                    LEGISLATION
           2006                      5,808                           3,160                                                                   21
           2007                  5,682 (490)                     3,427 (326)                                                                 28
           2008                  5,212 (312)                     2,983 (104)                         30,961                                  26
           2009                  5,606 (432)                     4,166 (335)                         49,105                                  33
           2010                  6,017 (607)                     3,619 (237)                         33,113                                  17
           2011                  7,909 (456)                     3,969 (278)                  42,291 (15,205)                                15
           2012                7,705 (1,153)                     4,746 (518)                  46,570 (17,368)                                21
           2013                9,460 (1,199)                     5,776 (470)                  44,758 (10,603)                                58
       The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses are those of labor
       trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.




An education session for
farmworkers on their rights under
the Fair Food Program takes
place during the workday on a
Florida farm. The Coalition of
Immokalee Workers’ Fair Food
Program has brought together
tens of thousands of workers,
26 agribusinesses, and 12 retail
food corporations to prevent
forced labor and worker abuses—
including sexual violence—in
Florida’s tomato industry.




                                                                                                                                                                    45
                                     2014 tIP REPORT HEROES
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT

                                     Each year, the Department of State honors individuals around the world who have devoted their lives to the
                                     fight against human trafficking. These individuals are NGO workers, lawmakers, police officers, and concerned
                                     citizens who are committed to ending modern slavery. They are recognized for their tireless efforts—despite
                                     resistance, opposition, and threats to their lives—to protect victims, punish offenders, and raise awareness of
                                     ongoing criminal practices in their countries and abroad.


                                     Gilbert Munda                                              Bhanuja Sharan Lal
                                     Democratic Republic                                        India
                                     of the Congo (DRC)




                                     Gilbert Munda is the coordinator of the Action Center      As director of the Manav Sansadhan Evam Mahila
                                     for Youth and Vulnerable Children (CAJED), and as          Vikas Sansthan (MSEMVS), Bhanuja Sharan Lal leads
                                     a former orphan himself and father of 12 children,         more than 75 frontline anti-trafficking workers in
                                     Mr. Munda’s tremendous compassion drives his               northern India. MSEMVS has enabled communities to
                                     effective leadership. CAJED is an NGO created in           progressively dismantle entrenched systems of modern
                                     1992 in the Democratic Republic of Congo to provide        slavery at brick kilns, farms, and quarries. They have
                                     temporary care and full support for vulnerable children,   transformed hundreds of communities into no-go
                                     specifically those formerly associated with armed          zones for traffickers, making modern slavery virtually
                                     groups, before reunifying them with their families.        nonexistent in more than 130 villages.
                                     Under Mr. Munda’s leadership, CAJED has been a             Led by Mr. Lal, MSEMVS helps trafficking victims
                                     UNICEF partner since 2004, and operates a shelter,         establish Community Vigilance Committees, a
                                     which provides children with psychosocial support,         process through which groups of survivors achieve
                                     recreation activities, non-formal education, and family    freedom by exercising collective power through
                                     reunification assistance.                                  district-level networks and pressuring police to
                                     In 2011, CAJED formed a consortium with other              enforce anti-trafficking laws. MSEMVS assists in
                                     disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration-            freeing approximately 65 men, women, and children
                                     focused NGOs in North Kivu, and, through this              every month, and provides survivors with follow-up
                                     extensive network, CAJED has assisted over 9,000           reintegration support. MSEMVS has also launched and
                                     children who have been demobilized from armed              manages a shelter that provides rights-based assistance
                                     groups. Mr. Munda engages directly with MONUSCO            and recovery to sex trafficking survivors.
                                     and UN teams of first responders in the release of         Additionally, Mr. Lal has focused intensely on
                                     children. Together with his team, Mr. Munda has            eradicating child labor. Currently, 14 village-based
                                     risked his life to help free these children, but, in a     schools enable more than 500 child trafficking
                                     country torn by conflict, the efforts of Mr. Munda put     survivors to catch up on their education, so they can
                                     these children on the path to healing and help bring       successfully enter public schools within three years.
                                     peace to the DRC.                                          These schools, which open and close as necessary,
                                                                                                enable large numbers of children to come out of slavery
                                                                                                and receive an education.
        46
                                                                                                                           2014 TIP REPORT HEROES
Myeongjin Ko                                                 Elisabeth Sioufi
Republic of Korea (ROK)                                      Lebanon




Myeongjin Ko is a tireless activist who directs the          Elisabeth Sioufi, director of the Beirut Bar Association’s
Dasihamkke Center for sex trafficking victims in South       Institute for Human Rights, relentlessly advocates for
Korea. The Center conducts outreach and counseling for       and raises awareness about victims of human trafficking.
victims of sex trafficking, and assists them with legal      She was a key leader in advocating the passage of
and medical services. In response to the increasing          Lebanon’s first anti-trafficking law in 2012, and she
number of runaway teenagers falling into prostitution        continues to make trafficking a top priority for the
and sex trafficking, Ms. Ko established a special division   Lebanese government. Ms. Sioufi is an active member
at the Center that offers services for juvenile victims 24   of various national steering committees working to
hours a day, 365 days a year. Since its establishment in     protect local and foreign domestic workers, combat
2013, the juvenile care division has provided counseling     human trafficking, prevent torture, and promote child
for approximately 10,000 individual cases in person,         protection, and is the Secretary of the Human Rights
over the phone, and online.                                  Commission of the International Union of Lawyers.
In addition to her work on the ground, Ms. Ko has            Ms. Sioufi played an instrumental role in drafting the
published several manuals in multiple languages on           National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons in
helping and providing services to sex trafficking victims,   Lebanon and the National Action Plan for Combating
and has distributed them to Korean embassies and             Trafficking in Persons, both of which were finalized
consulates in the United States, Japan, and Australia,       in 2013 and await cabinet approval. She regularly
three primary destinations for Korean sex trafficking        holds training sessions on human trafficking for law
victims.                                                     enforcement, army, and community police personnel,
Ms. Ko also directs Eco-Gender, an advocacy network          as well as reporters to improve coverage of human
of Korean anti-trafficking organizations, and has led        trafficking stories in Lebanon.
several civic groups with that network to raise public       Ms. Sioufi also led the effort to create a government
awareness. The Ministry of Justice named Ms. Ko a            manual that defined human trafficking and outlined
Guardian of Female and Children Victim’s Rights in           ways to combat it, and held a roundtable with
2013.                                                        government representatives and NGOs to agree upon
                                                             a set of indicators for identifying victims of trafficking.


                                                                                                                                47
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                     Tek Narayan kunwar                                           Beatrice Jedy-Agba
                                     Nepal                                                        Nigeria




                                     Tek Narayan Kunwar, Lalitpur District Judge, has             Beatrice Jedy-Agba was appointed Executive Secretary
                                     been at the forefront of efforts in Nepal to counter         of Nigeria’s National Agency for the Prohibition of
                                     human trafficking by fully implementing the Human            Trafficking in Persons and other Related Matters
                                     Trafficking and Transportation Control Act, while            (NAPTIP) in 2011. NAPTIP is responsible for enhancing
                                     championing the rights of victims. Judge Kunwar’s            the effectiveness of law enforcement, preventing root
                                     victim-centered approach has provided a much needed          causes, and providing victim protection. The Agency
                                     ray of hope in the ongoing legal struggle against            has nine shelters across the country, and has assisted
                                     trafficking. During his previous tenure in District          in providing assistance and rehabilitation to thousands
                                     Court Makwanpur, he pioneered a “Fast Track Court            of survivors.
                                     System” to decrease the length of time survivors must        Mrs. Jedy-Agba is transforming the Nigerian national
                                     wait to appear. Judge Kunwar also allows survivors to        landscape with respect to combating trafficking.
                                     choose a court date (previously, they would receive little   Under her leadership, NAPTIP has become a model
                                     notice), and ensures that hearings proceed continually       throughout Africa for coordination of government
                                     until a case is decided.                                     anti-trafficking efforts. Her work has resulted in
                                     Judge Kunwar also takes a victim-centered approach           the incorporation of human trafficking issues into
                                     to sentencing. In May 2013, recognizing the need for         national development discourse and planning. She
                                     immediate compensation, he took the unprecedented            has improved NAPTIP’s relationships with critical
                                     step of ordering the government of Nepal to pay the          partners in Nigeria’s anti-trafficking response, such as
                                     equivalent of approximately $3,000 to a trafficking          local and international NGOs and foreign governments.
                                     survivor. He also established new jurisprudence to           Not focused solely on the South/North trafficking
                                     impose appropriately severe penalties for this egregious     routes, she has made significant efforts to return and
                                     crime.                                                       reintegrate Nigerian survivors of human trafficking
                                     The Judicial Council of Nepal, a national government         from several West African countries, and has led
                                     agency, named Judge Kunwar the Best Performing Judge         collaboration to address the trade in the region. Mrs.
                                     of 2013 for his aggressive approach to combating human       Jedy-Agba also has initiated human trafficking public
                                     trafficking. He has published extensively on human           awareness campaigns to increase understanding and
                                     rights and international law, judicial independence,         mobilize the general public.
                                     and gender equality and law.
      48
                                                                                                                        2014 TIP REPORT HEROES
Jhinna Pinchi                                                Monica Boseff
Peru                                                         Romania




Survivor Jhinna Pinchi was the first trafficking victim in   Monica Boseff is the executive director of the Open
Peru to face her traffickers in court. Since her escape in   Door Foundation (Usa Deschisa) and driving force
2009, she has taken extraordinary risks. She has faced       behind an emergency aftercare shelter specifically
threats of death and violence, surmounted repeated           designed for female victims of human trafficking in
social and legal obstacles, and challenged the status        Bucharest, Romania. In a country where government
quo.                                                         funding for survivor aftercare is limited, opening
In 2007, Ms. Pinchi was trafficked from her home in          a shelter is a monumental undertaking. Yet, after
the Peruvian Amazon and exploited in the commercial          surveying other organizations and speaking to
sex trade at a strip club in northern Peru. For over two     government officials to properly understand the need,
years, she was denied her basic rights. She was drugged,     Ms. Boseff launched the emergency shelter, Open
attacked, and exploited. Finally, she escaped and began      Door, in April 2013. The shelter provides residents with
her long struggle for justice.                               medical, psychological, and social support, helping
                                                             them heal physically, mentally, and emotionally. As
Ms. Pinchi encountered countless hurdles in bringing         part of the recovery process, Ms. Boseff also designed
her traffickers to court, including the suspicious           and implemented a job skills training component
deaths of two key witnesses. It took four years, but         to the program in coordination with the Starbucks
she never gave up. In December 2013, a Peruvian              Corporation, who agreed to hire Open Door graduates.
court convicted three of her abusers for trafficking
in persons, and sentenced two of them to 15 and 12           Whether in her capacity as the shelter supervisor,
years’ imprisonment, respectively. The lead defendant        or working relentlessly to identify and secure new
remains at large.                                            financial and in-kind assistance to keep the shelter
                                                             open and running, Ms. Boseff is a tireless advocate for
Ms. Pinchi has become a sought-after speaker and             increasing resources to combat trafficking and assist
advocate, and her remarkable story has been developed        survivors. What Ms. Boseff has been able to accomplish
into a documentary to raise awareness about human            in a very short time is testament to her strong will,
trafficking.                                                 faith, and passion for helping survivors.




                                                                                                                             49
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                     Charmaine GandHi-Andrews                                     Van Ngoc Ta
                                     Trinidad and Tobago                                          Vietnam




                                     As the first-ever Director of the Government of Trinidad     Van Ngoc Ta is the Chief Lawyer at Blue Dragon, an
                                     and Tobago’s Counter-Trafficking Unit at the Ministry        Australian charity based in Vietnam that has been
                                     of National Security, Charmaine Gandhi-Andrews               involved in helping children and young adults secure
                                     fundamentally changed the way the government                 their freedom from human trafficking since 2005.
                                     responds to the problem of human trafficking. Ms.            To date, Mr. Van has personally assisted over 300
                                     Gandhi-Andrews was for several years a leading and           trafficking victims of forced labor in Vietnam and sex
                                     outspoken advocate for trafficking in persons legislation,   trafficking in China. His approach involves undercover
                                     which the government ultimately implemented                  operations to locate victims, and his team works with
                                     in January 2013. Largely due to her tireless efforts,        Vietnamese authorities to arrange and conduct a plan
                                     Trinidad and Tobago has an infrastructure in place           to facilitate victims’ release.
                                     to recognize, identify, and support victims. In her          With years of experience under his belt, Mr. Van has
                                     first year she led over 20 investigations into suspected     developed a comprehensive approach to assisting
                                     trafficking cases, resulting in charges filed against 12     trafficking victims, including locating victims,
                                     alleged traffickers—including government officials—          providing services, assisting them in making formal
                                     and uncovered a dangerous network of criminal gangs          statements to police, supporting their reintegration
                                     facilitating human trafficking in the Caribbean region.      into their communities, and representing them in
                                     In 2013, the Counter-Trafficking Unit hosted over 20         court against their traffickers. Mr. Van’s tireless efforts
                                     presentations and workshops designed to educate              have earned him the trust of police and government
                                     law enforcement, non-governmental organizations,             officials, who often invite him to assist them in their
                                     the legal community, and students about human                anti-trafficking efforts.
                                     trafficking. This outreach broke down barriers by            In addition to direct services, Mr. Van has had a great
                                     connecting and sensitizing resource providers, who           impact on communities in Vietnam where he conducts
                                     have since opened their doors and wallets to support         awareness campaigns and meets with leaders and
                                     trafficking victims. In a short few years, Ms. Gandhi-       families to educate them on prevention. Truly making a
                                     Andrews, now the Deputy Chief Immigration Officer,           difference both at the individual level and on a national
                                     has become the public face of anti-trafficking efforts       scale, Mr. Van is influencing the way Vietnam thinks
                                     in Trinidad and Tobago, shaping a national dialogue          and acts about trafficking.
                                     that embraces proactive efforts to combat trafficking
                                     in persons.
        50
                                                                                                                                 2014 TIP REPORT HEROES
                                                    In Memoriam

       Irene Fernandez, Malaysia
                                                                     In early 2014, the anti-trafficking community suffered
                                                                     the enormous loss of Irene Fernandez, the co-founder
                                                                     and director of Tenaganita, a legal and advocacy
                                                                     organization committed to defending the rights of
                                                                     migrant workers, refugees, and trafficking victims in
                                                                     Malaysia. Fernandez fought tirelessly to expose and
                                                                     correct injustices faced by vulnerable groups in the
                                                                     country, persevering in the face of threats and pressure.
                                                                     Her trailblazing efforts provided migrant worker
                                                                     trafficking victims with much needed legal assistance
                                                                     and advocacy. For this valuable work, Fernandez was
                                                                     recognized as a TIP Report Hero in the 2006 Trafficking
                                                                     in Persons Report.




                                    Photo courtesy of Malaysiakini




74-year-old Father Hermann Klein-
Hitpass works with women and girls in
prostitution in Namibia, some of whom
are victims of sex trafficking. Father
Klein-Hitpass started a daycare shelter,
and helps those in his program with
food and clothing.                                                                                                                    51
                                     The Intersection between Environmental
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                     Degradation and Human Trafficking


                                     C
                                            ertain industries face particularly high environmental risks, including agriculture, fishing and
                                            aquaculture, logging, and mining. Workers in these sectors also face risks; the use of forced labor
                                            has been documented along the supply chains of many commercial sectors. Exploitation of both
                                     people and natural resources appears even more likely when the yield is obtained or produced in illegal,
                                     unregulated, or environmentally harmful ways and in areas where monitoring and legal enforcement are
                                     weak.




                                     Agriculture (Crops and Livestock)
                                     Unsustainable agricultural practices around the world are a major cause of environmental degradation. The
                                     manner in which land is used can either protect or destroy biodiversity, water resources, and soil. Some
                                     governments and corporations are working to ensure that the agricultural sector becomes increasingly more
                                     productive, and also that this productivity is achieved in an environmentally sustainable way. Alongside
                                     the movement to protect the environment from harm, governments must also protect agricultural workers
                                     from exploitation.

                                                                                  Agriculture is considered by the ILO to be one of the most
                                                                                  hazardous employment sectors. Particular risks to workers
                                                                                  include exposure to harsh chemicals and diseases, work in
                                                                                  extreme weather conditions, and operation of dangerous
                                                                                  machiner y without proper training. Moreover, many
                                                                                  agricultural workers are vulnerable to human trafficking due
                                                                                  to their exclusion from coverage by local labor laws, pressure
                                                                                  on growers to reduce costs, insufficient internal monitoring
                                                                                  and audits of labor policies, and lack of government oversight.

                                                                                  As documented in this Report over the years, adults and
                                                                                  children are compelled to work in various agricultural sectors
                                                                                  around the globe.

                                                                                  For example:

                                                                                  ➤➤ Throughout Africa, children and adults are forced to work
                                                                                      on farms and plantations harvesting cotton, tea, coffee,
                                                                                      cocoa, fruits, vegetables, rubber, rice, tobacco, and sugar.
                                                                                      There are documented examples of children forced to
                                                                                      herd cattle in Lesotho, Mozambique, and Namibia, and
                                                                                      camels in Chad.



        52
  ➤➤   I n Europe, men from Brazil, Bulgaria, China, and India are subjected to forced labor on horticulture




                                                                                                                     DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
        sites and fruit farms in Belgium. Men and women are exploited in the agricultural sectors in Croatia,
        Georgia, the Netherlands, Spain, and the United Kingdom.
  ➤➤   In Latin America, adults and children are forced to harvest tomatoes in Mexico, gather fruits and
        grains in Argentina, and herd livestock in Brazil.
  ➤➤   I n the Middle East, traffickers exploit foreign migrant men in the agricultural sectors of Israel and
        Jordan. Traffickers reportedly force Syrian refugees, including children, to harvest fruits and vegetables
        on farms in Lebanon.
  ➤➤   I n the United States, victims of labor trafficking have been found among the nation’s migrant and
        seasonal farmworkers, including adults and children who harvest crops and raise animals.




Fishing and Aquaculture
The 2012 Trafficking in Persons Report highlighted forced labor on fishing vessels occurring concurrently with
illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, which threatens food security and the preservation of marine
resources. Vessels involved in other environmental crimes, such as poaching, may also trap their crews in
forced labor. Testimonies from survivors of forced labor on fishing vessels have revealed that many of the
vessels on which they suffered exploitation used banned fishing gear, fished in prohibited areas, failed to
report or misreported catches, operated with fake licenses, and docked in unauthorized ports—all illegal
fishing practices that contribute to resource depletion and species endangerment. Without proper regulation,
monitoring, and enforcement of laws governing both fishing practices and working conditions, criminals
will continue to threaten the environmental sustainability of oceans and exploit workers with impunity.

In recent years, a growing body of evidence has documented forced labor on inland, coastal, and deep
sea fishing vessels, as well as in shrimp farming and seafood processing. This evidence has prompted the
international advocacy community to increase pressure on governments and private sector stakeholders to
address the exploitation of men, women, and children who work in the commercial fishing and aquaculture
sector.

Reports of maritime forced labor include:

  ➤➤   In Europe, Belize-flagged fishing vessels operating in the Barents Sea north of Norway have used
        forced labor, as have vessels employing Ukrainian men in the Sea of Okhotsk.
  ➤➤   I n the Caribbean, foreign-flagged fishing vessels have used forced labor in the waters of Jamaica and
        Trinidad and Tobago.
  ➤➤    long the coastline of sub-Saharan Africa, forced labor has become more apparent on European and
       A
       Asian fishing vessels seeking to catch fish in poorly regulated waters. Traffickers have exploited victims
       in the territorial waters of Mauritius, South Africa, and Senegal, as well as aboard small lake-based
       boats in Ghana and Kenya.




                                                                                                                          53
                                       ➤➤   In Asia, men from Cambodia, Burma, the Philippines, Indonesia, Vietnam, China, India, and
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
                                             Bangladesh are subjected to forced labor on foreign-flagged (largely Taiwanese, Korean, and Hong
                                             Kong) vessels operating in territorial waters of countries in Southeast Asia, the Pacific region, and
                                             New Zealand.


                                     Logging
                                     One out of five people in the world relies directly
                                     upon forests for food, income, building materials, and
                                     medicine. Yet laws to protect forests are often weak
                                     and poorly monitored. Illegal logging has led to forest
                                     degradation, deforestation, corruption at the highest
                                     levels in governments, and human rights abuses
                                     against entire communities, including indigenous
                                     populations. Human trafficking is included in this
                                     list of abuses. While some governments and civil
                                     society organizations have voiced strong opposition
                                     to illegal logging and made pledges to protect this
                                     valuable resource, the international community
                                     has given comparably little attention to the workers
                                     cutting down the trees, transporting the logs, or
                                     working in the intermediate processing centers. At
                                     the same time, the serious problem of workers in
                                     logging camps sexually exploiting trafficking victims
                                     has garnered insufficient attention.

                                     There is a dearth of documented information on working conditions of loggers and the way the logging
                                     industry increases the risk of human trafficking in nearby communities.

                                     Recent reports of trafficking in this sector include:
                                       ➤➤   I n Asia, victims have been subjected to labor trafficking in the logging industry. For example, Solomon
                                             Islands authorities reported a Malaysian logging company subjected Malaysians to trafficking-related
                                             abuse in 2012. Burmese military-linked logging operations have used villagers for forced labor. North
                                             Koreans are forced to work in the Russian logging industry under bilateral agreements. Migrant workers
                                             in logging camps in Pacific Island nations have forced children into marriage and the sex trade.
                                       ➤➤   In Brazil, privately owned logging companies have subjected Brazilian men to forced labor.
                                       ➤➤   The Government of Belarus has imposed forced labor on Belarusian nationals in its logging industry.


                                                                                               Mining
                                                                                               Mining—particularly artisanal and small-scale
                                                                                               mining—often has a negative impact on the
                                                                                               environment, including through deforestation and
                                                                                               pollution due to widespread use of mercury. The
                                                                                               United Nations Environment Programme estimates
                                                                                               that the mining sector is responsible for 37 percent of
                                                                                               global mercury emissions, which harm ecosystems
                                                                                               and have serious health impacts on humans and
                                                                                               animals. In addition to degrading the environment,
                                                                                               mining often occurs in remote or rural areas with
                                                                                               limited government presence, leaving individuals
                                                                                               in mining communities in Latin America, Africa,
                                                                                               and Asia more vulnerable to forced labor and sex
                                                                                               trafficking.




      54
Examples of human trafficking related to the




                                                                                                                    DEFINITIONS AND METHODOLOGY
mining industry include:

  ➤➤   In the eastern Democratic Republic of the
        Congo, a significant number of Congolese
        men and boys working as artisanal miners are
        exploited in debt bondage by businesspeople
        and supply dealers from whom they acquire
        cash advances, tools, food, and other provisions
        at inflated prices and to whom they must sell
        mined minerals at prices below the market
        value. The miners are forced to continue
        working to pay off constantly accumulating
        debts that are virtually impossible to repay.
  ➤➤   I n Angola, some Congolese migrants seeking
        employment in diamond-mining districts
        are exploited in forced labor in the mines or
        forced prostitution in mining communities.
  ➤➤    gold rush in southeastern Senegal has
       A
       created serious health and environmental challenges for affected communities due to the use of
       mercury and cyanide in mining operations. The rapid influx of workers has also contributed to the
       forced labor and sex trafficking of children and women in mining areas.
  ➤➤   I n Guyana, traffickers are attracted to the country’s interior gold mining communities where there
        is limited government presence. Here, they exploit Guyanese girls in the sex trade in mining camps.
  ➤➤   I n Peru, forced labor in the gold mining industry remains a particular problem. In 2013, a report
        titled, Risk Analysis of Indicators of Forced Labor and Human Trafficking in Illegal Gold Mining in Peru,
        catalogued the result of interviews with nearly 100 mine workers and individuals involved in related
        industries (such as cooks, mechanics, and people in prostitution). It traces how gold tainted by human
        trafficking ends up in products available in the global marketplace, from watches to smart phones.


Next Steps
Governments, private industry, and civil society have an opportunity to push for greater environmental
protections in tandem with greater protections for workers, including those victimized by human trafficking.
Additional research is needed to further study the relationship between environmental degradation and
human trafficking in these and other industries. It is also essential to strengthen partnerships to better
understand this intersection and tackle both forms of exploitation, individually and together.




                                                                                                                         55
56
     2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
The Tiers




                                                          THE TIERS
TIER 1
Countries whose governments fully comply with the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act’s (TVPA) minimum
standards.



TIER 2
Countries whose governments do not fully comply
with the TVPA’s minimum standards, but are making
significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance
with those standards.



TIER 2 WATCH LIST
Countries whose governments do not fully comply
with the TVPA’s minimum standards, but are making
significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance
with those standards AND:

a) The absolute number of victims of severe
    forms of trafficking is very significant or is
    significantly increasing;

    here is a failure to provide evidence of
b) T
   increasing efforts to combat severe forms of
   trafficking in persons from the previous year; or

c) T
    he determination that a country is making
   significant efforts to bring itself into
   compliance with minimum standards was
   based on commitments by the country to take
   additional future steps over the next year.



TIER 3
Countries whose governments do not fully comply
with the minimum standards and are not making
significant efforts to do so.




                                                            57
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT   TIER PLACEMENTS
                                     Tier 1
                                     Armenia                     Finland              Luxembourg                      Slovenia
                                     Australia                   France               Macedonia                       Spain
                                     Austria                     Germany              Netherlands                     Sweden
                                     Belgium                     Iceland              New Zealand                     SWITZERLAND
                                     Canada                      Ireland              Nicaragua                       Taiwan
                                     Chile                       Israel               Norway                          United Kingdom
                                     Czech Republic              Italy                Poland                          United States of America
                                     Denmark                     Korea, south         Slovak Republic



                                     Tier 2
                                     Afghanistan                 Dominican Republic   Kyrgyz Republic                 Portugal
                                     Albania                     Ecuador              Latvia                          Romania
                                     Argentina                   Egypt                Liberia                         St. Lucia
                                     Aruba                       El Salvador          Lithuania                       ST. MAARTEN
                                     Azerbaijan                  Estonia              Macau                           Senegal
                                     the Bahamas                 Ethiopia             Maldives                        Serbia
                                     Bangladesh                  Fiji                 Malawi                          Seychelles
                                     Barbados                    Gabon                Malta                           Sierra Leone
                                     Benin                       Georgia              Mauritius                       Singapore
                                     Bhutan                      Ghana                Mexico                          South Africa
                                     Brazil                      Greece               Micronesia                      Swaziland
                                     Brunei                      Guatemala            Moldova                         Tajikistan
                                     Bulgaria                    Honduras             Mongolia                        Trinidad & Tobago
                                     Burkina Faso                Hong Kong            Montenegro                      Togo
                                     CaBO Verde                  Hungary              Mozambique                      Tonga
                                     Cameroon                    India                Nepal                           Turkey
                                     Chad                        Indonesia            Niger                           Uganda
                                     Colombia                    Iraq                 Nigeria                         United Arab Emirates
                                     Congo, Republic of          Japan                Oman                            VIETNAM
                                     Costa Rica                  Jordan               Palau                           Zambia
                                     Cote d’Ivoire               Kazakhstan           Paraguay
                                     Croatia                     Kiribati             Peru
                                     CuraCao                     KOSOVO               Philippines



                                     Tier 2 Watch List
                                     Angola                      China (PRC)          Lesotho                         Solomon Islands
                                     Antigua & Barbuda           Comoros              MadagaSCar                      SOuth Sudan
                                     Bahrain                     Cyprus               Mali                            Sri Lanka
                                     Belarus                     Djibouti             Marshall Islands                Sudan
                                     Belize                      Guinea               Morocco                         Suriname
                                     Bolivia                     Guyana               Namibia                         Tanzania
                                     Bosnia & Herzegovina        Haiti                Pakistan                        Timor-Leste
                                     Botswana                    Jamaica              Panama                          TUNISIA
                                     Burma                       Kenya                Qatar                           Turkmenistan
                                     Burundi                     Laos                 Rwanda                          Ukraine
                                     Cambodia                    Lebanon              St. Vincent & The Grenadines    Uruguay



                                     Tier 3
                                     Algeria                     Guinea-Bissau        Papua New Guinea                Venezuela*
                                     Central African Republic    Iran                 Russia                          Zimbabwe
                                     Congo, Democratic Rep. Of   Korea, North         Saudi Arabia
                                     Cuba                        Kuwait               Syria
                                     Equatorial Guinea           Libya                THAILAND*
                                     Eritrea                     Malaysia*            Uzbekistan
                                     The Gambia                  Mauritania           Yemen



                                     Special case
                                     Somalia
                                                                                                                     * Auto downgrade from Tier 2 Watch List
        58
                                                                                                                                                                           TIER PLACEMENTS/COUNTRY MAPS
                      MAURITANIA             MALI
CABO VERDE
                                                                   NIGER                 CHAD
                                                                                                                 SUDAN               ERITREA
                SENEGAL
  THE GAMBIA                                 BURKINA
   GUINEA-BISSAU                              FASO                                                                                             DJIBOUTI
                        GUINEA                      BENIN
                                                                NIGERIA
           SIERRA LEONE              COTE                                                    CENTRAL            SOUTH              ETHIOPIA
                                    D’IVOIRE GHANA                                           AFRICAN            SUDAN
                        LIBERIA                                                              REPUBLIC                                                SOMALIA
                                                       TOGO            CAMEROON


                                                  EQUATORIAL GUINEA                        DEMOCRATIC
                                                                                   REP.                    UGANDA                KENYA
                                                                                    OF      REPUBLIC
                                                                        GABON     CONGO
                                                                                             OF THE RWANDA
                                                                                             CONGO BURUNDI

                                                                                                                       TANZANIA
                                                                                                                                                      SEYCHELLES


                                                                                                                                                    COMOROS
                                                                                    ANGOLA
                                                                                                           ZAMBIA


                                                                                                                                      MALAWI
                                                                                                              ZIMBABWE
                                                                                                                             MOZAMBIQUE    MADAGASCAR
                                                                                  NAMIBIA                                                                      MAURITIUS

                                                                                               BOTSWANA




               Africa                                                                          SOUTH AFRICA
                                                                                                                            SWAZILAND


                                                                                                                        LESOTHO




      Boundary representation is not authoritative.




                                                                                               VICTIMS                            NEW OR AMENDED
          YEAR            PROSECUTIONS                   CONVICTIONS
                                                                                              IDENTIFIED                            LEGISLATION
             2007                 123 (28)                       63 (26)                                                                       5
             2008                 109 (18)                       90 (20)                            7,799                                      10
             2009                 325 (47)                      117 (30)                           10,861                                      8
             2010                272 (168)                     163 (113)                            9,626                                      5
             2011                 340 (45)                     217 (113)                      8,900 (5,098)                                    2
             2012                493 (273)                     252 (177)                     10,043 (6,544)                                    4
             2013                572 (245)                     341 (192)                     10,096 (2,250)                                    7
      The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses
      are those of labor trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.


      Tier Placements
             Tier 1                Tier 2                  Tier 2 Watch List                     Tier 3                  Special Case
                                                                                                                                                                                59
                                                                              MONGOLIA
     2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
TURKMENISTAN                                                                                                                  NORTH KOREA

                                                                      CHINA                                                   SOUTH KOREA
                                                                                                                                         JAPAN



AN




                                                                                                                  Taiwan
                                                                                             Macau
AN                                                                   BURMA                            Hong Kong

                                                                                 LAOS

                                                                              THAILAND     VIETNAM

                                                                                   CAMBODIA                           PHILIPPINES


                                                                                                                                                         FEDERATED STATES
                                                                                                                                         PALAU                                   MARSHALL ISLANDS
                                                                                                                                                           OF MICRONESIA
                                                                                              BRUNEI
                                                                                        MALAYSIA
                                                                                    SINGAPORE


                                                                                                                                                                                          KIRIBATI
                                                                                              I N D O N E S I A

                                                                                                                                                    PAPUA NEW GUINEA

                                                                                                                           TIMOR-LESTE
                                                                                                                                                                       SOLOMON ISLANDS


                                                                                                                                                                                              FIJI




                                          EAST ASIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TONGA



                                                                                                                               AUSTRALIA




                                          & Pacific                                                                                                                             NEW ZEALAND




                                          Boundary representation is not authoritative.




                                                                                                                                           VICTIMS                          NEW OR AMENDED
                                              YEAR           PROSECUTIONS                     CONVICTIONS
                                                                                                                                          IDENTIFIED                          LEGISLATION
                                               2007                 1,047 (7)                          651 (7)                                                                           4
                                               2008                1,083 (106)                        643 (35)                                   3,374                                   2
                                               2009                 357 (113)                         256 (72)                                   5,238                                   3
                                               2010                  427 (53)                          177 (9)                                   2,597                                   0
                                               2011                2,127 (55)                         978 (55)                           8,454 (3,140)                                   4
                                               2012                1,682 (115)                       1,251 (103)                         8,521 (1,804)                                   4
                                               2013                2,460 (188)                       1,271 (39)                          7,886 (1,077)                                   3
                                          The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses
                                          are those of labor trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.




                                          Tier Placements
                                                Tier 1                 Tier 2                      Tier 2 Watch List                       Tier 3                 Tier 3 (Auto downgrade)
             60
     ICELAND




                                                                                                                                                                              COUNTRY MAPS
                                                                                                                 FINLAND
                                                                                    SWEDEN

                                                                    NORWAY



                                                                                                                ESTONIA



                                                                    DENMARK
                                                                                                              LATVIA                      R U S S I A
                                                                                                          LITHUANIA

            IRELAND                                    NETHERLANDS

                                           UNITED                                                                   BELARUS
                                          KINGDOM                                             POLAND
                                                      BELGIUM         GERMANY
                                                                                     CZECH
                                                                     LUX.           REPUBLIC                                 UKRAINE
                                                                                                  SLOVAKIA

                                                         SWITZERLAND               AUSTRIA HUNGARY                        MOLDOVA

                                                    FRANCE                      SLOVENIA                   ROMANIA
                                                                         I TA LY CROATIA      BOS.&   SERBIA
                                                                                               HER.
                                                                                                        KOSOVO        BULGARIA
                                                                                      MONTENEGRO                                                         GEORGIA
                                                                                                         MACEDONIA
                                                                                                                                                        ARMENIA
                PORTUGAL
                                       SPAIN                                                         GREECE
                                                                                                                                     TURKEY
                                                                                              ALBANIA                                                        AZERBAIJAN


                                                                                  MALTA
                                                                                                                             CYPRUS




Europe
                                                                                                                                         ARUBA*
                                                                                                                                         CURACAO*
                                                                                                                                         St. Maarten*

                                                                                                                                                                St. Maarten
                                                                                                                                                Aruba



                                                                                                                                                            Curaçao




Boundary representation is not authoritative.




                                                                                         VICTIMS                            NEW OR AMENDED
    YEAR           PROSECUTIONS                    CONVICTIONS
                                                                                        IDENTIFIED                            LEGISLATION
     2007                2,820 (111)                    1,941 (80)                                                                        7
     2008                 2,808 (83)                    1,721 (16)                           8,981                                        1
     2009                2,208 (160)                   1,733 (149)                          14,650                                       14
     2010                 2,803 (47)                    1,850 (38)                           8,548                                        4
     2011                3,188 (298)                    1,601 (81)                    10,185 (1,796)                                      2
     2012                3,161 (361)                   1,818 (112)                    11,905 (2,306)                                      3
     2013                3,223 (275)                   2,684 (127)                    10,374 (1,863)                                     35
The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses
are those of labor trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.


                                                                                                                       * As part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
                                                                                                                         Aruba, Curacao and St. Maarten are covered
                                                                                                                         by the State Department’s Bureau
Tier Placements                                                                                                          of European Affairs.


      Tier 1                 Tier 2                  Tier 2 Watch List                     Tier 3
                                                                                                                                                                                61
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT




                                                                                          TUNISIA                                                     SYRIA
                                                                                                                                         LEBANON
                                                     MOROCCO                                                                              ISRAEL                IRAQ                    IRAN
                                                                                                                                                   JORDAN

                                                                      ALGERIA                                                                                              KUWAIT
                                                                                                       LIBYA
                                                                                                                                   EGYPT                                          BAHRAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                      QATAR
                                                                                                                                                              SAUDI ARABIA             UAE

                                                                                                                                                                                              OMAN




                                                                                                                                                                          YEMEN




                                     NEAR EAST
                                     Boundary representation is not authoritative.




                                                                                                                                VICTIMS                            NEW OR AMENDED
                                         YEAR            PROSECUTIONS                    CONVICTIONS
                                                                                                                               IDENTIFIED                            LEGISLATION
                                          2007                  415 (181)                      361 (179)                                                                          1
                                          2008                   120 (56)                         26 (2)                              688                                         6
                                          2009                     80 (9)                         57 (8)                            1,011                                         6
                                          2010                   323 (63)                        68 (10)                            1,304                                         1
                                          2011                   209 (17)                         60 (5)                      1,831 (1,132)                                       2
                                          2012                   249 (29)                       149 (15)                      4,047 (1,063)                                       1
                                          2013                   119 (25)                         60 (4)                        1,460 (172)                                       4
                                     The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses
                                     are those of labor trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.




                                     Tier Placements
                                           Tier 1                 Tier 2                  Tier 2 Watch List                     Tier 3
        62
                                                                               KAZAKHSTAN




                                                                                                                                                        COUNTRY MAPS
                                                                       UZBEKISTAN
                                                                                                        KYRGYZ
                                                                                                        REPUBLIC

                                                           TURKMENISTAN
                                                                                           TAJIKISTAN




                                                                            AFGHANISTAN



                                                                                                                                              BHUTAN
                                                                                    PAKISTAN                               NEPAL




                                                                                                                 INDIA


                                                                                                                                           BANGLADESH




                                                                                                                          SRI LANKA



          SOUTH &                                                                                           MALDIVES




          CENTRAL ASIA
      Boundary representation is not authoritative.




A                                                                                               VICTIMS                            NEW OR AMENDED
          YEAR            PROSECUTIONS                    CONVICTIONS
                                                                                               IDENTIFIED                            LEGISLATION
           2007                  824 (162)                      298 (33)                                                                          4
           2008                    644 (7)                       342 (7)                            3,510                                         2
           2009                 1,989 (56)                     1,450 (10)                           8,325                                         1
           2010                1,460 (196)                     1,068 (11)                           4,357                                         1
           2011                   974 (24)                      829 (11)                      3,907 (1,089)                                       2
         SWAZILAND
           2012                  1,043 (6)                       874 (4)                      4,415 (2,150)                                       1

CA
         2013
     LESOTHO                   1,904 (259)                      974 (58)                      7,124 (1,290)                                       5
      The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses
      are those of labor trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.




      Tier Placements

            Tier 1                 Tier 2                  Tier 2 Watch List                     Tier 3
                                                                                                                                                          63
                                                                                                      CANADA
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT



                                                                                                            UNITED STATES




                                                                                                                                                      THE BAHAMAS
                                                                                                           MEXICO

                                                                                                                                             CUBA               DOMINICAN
                                                                                                                                                                REPUBLIC
                                                                                                                                            JAMAICA
                                                                                                                                  BELIZE                HAITI      Puerto        ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
                                                                                                                                       HONDURAS                     Rico
                                                                                                                     GUATEMALA                                     ST. LUCIA
                                                                                                                                                                                      BARBADOS
                                                                                                                                            NICARAGUA
                                                                                                                     EL SALVADOR                                                ST. VINCENT AND GRENADINES
                                                                                                                                             PANAMA                              TRINIDAD
                                                                                                                               COSTA RICA                                       AND TOBAGO
                                                                                                                                                                VENEZUELA
                                                                                                                                                                                GUYANA
                                                                                                                                                                                          SURINAME

                                                                                                                                                      COLOMBIA


                                                                                                                                            ECUADOR



                                                                                                                                                    PERU

                                                                                                                                                                                      BRAZIL




                                     WESTERN
                                                                                                                                                                     BOLIVIA



                                                                                                                                                                               PARAGUAY




                                     HEMISPHERE
                                                                                                                                                           CHILE




                                                                                                                                                                    ARGENTINA

                                                                                                                                                                                   URUGUAY




                                     Boundary representation is not authoritative.




                                                                                                                              VICTIMS                               NEW OR AMENDED
                                         YEAR            PROSECUTIONS                    CONVICTIONS
                                                                                                                             IDENTIFIED                               LEGISLATION
                                          2007                   426 (1)                         113 (1)                                                                            7
                                          2008                  448 (42)                        161 (24)                           6,609                                            5
                                          2009                  647 (47)                        553 (66)                           9,020                                            1
                                          2010                  732 (80)                        293 (65)                           6,681                                            6
                                          2011                  624 (17)                        279 (14)                     9,014 (2,490)                                          3
                                          2012                1,077 (369)                      402 (107)                     7,639 (3,501)                                          8
                                          2013                1,182 (207)                       446 (50)                     7,818 (3,951)                                          4
                                     The above statistics are estimates only, given the lack of uniformity in national reporting structures. The numbers in parentheses
                                     are those of labor trafficking prosecutions, convictions, and victims identified.




                                     Tier Placements
                                            Tier 1                Tier 2                  Tier 2 Watch List                     Tier 3                     Tier 3 (Auto downgrade)
        64
                                                    COUNTRY MAPS
Two young boys carry logs. The logging industry
in many countries is poorly regulated and
monitored, leaving children and adults vulnerable
to both forced labor and sexual exploitation.




                                                      65
                                        How to Read a Country Narrative
2014 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT

                                        This page shows a sample country narrative. The Prosecution, Protection, and Prevention sections of each
                                        country narrative describe how a government has or has not addressed the relevant TVPA minimum
                                        standards (see page 425), during the reporting period. This truncated narrative gives a few examples.


                                                                                  The country’s tier ranking is
                                                                                  based on the government’s
                                                                                    efforts against trafficking
                                                                                   as measured by the TVPA                                                                                      TVPA Minimum
                                                                                      minimum standards.                                                                                         Standard 4(2) –
                                                                                                                                                                                           whether the government
                                                                                                                                                                                         adequately protects victims
                                                                                                                                                                                          of trafficking by identifying
                                                         COUNTRY X (Tier 2 Watch List)                                         PRotection
                                                                                                                                                                                        them and ensuring they have
                                                                                                                               Country X made minimal progress in protecting victims of
                                                                                                                                                                                              access to necessary
                                                         Country X is a transit and destination country for men                trafficking during the reporting period. Although health
                                                         and women subjected to forced labor and, to a much lesser                                                                                  services.
                                                                                                                               care facilities reportedly refer suspected abuse cases to the
                                                         extent, forced prostitution. Men and women from South and             government anti-trafficking shelter for investigation, the
                                                         Southeast Asia, East Africa, and the Middle East voluntarily          government continues to lack a systematic procedure for law
                                                         travel to Country X as laborers and domestic servants, but            enforcement to identify victims of trafficking among vulnerable
                                                         some subsequently face conditions indicative of involuntary           populations, such as foreign workers awaiting deportation and
                                                         servitude. These conditions include threats of serious harm,          women arrested for prostitution; as a result, victims may be
                                         Profile of
                                                         including threats of legal action and deportation; withholding        punished and automatically deported without being identified             Summary of the
                                          human
                                                         of pay; restrictions on freedom of movement, including the            as victims or offered protection. The government reported                 government’s
                                                         confiscation of passports and travel documents and physical,          that the MOI has a process by which it refers victims to the             efforts to ensure
                                        trafficking
                                                         mental, and sexual abuse. In some cases, arriving migrant             trafficking shelter; however, this process is underutilized in
                                         in recent                                                                                                                                                       that trafficking
                                           years.        workers have found that the terms of employment in Country            practice. The trafficking shelter assisted 24 individuals during
                                                                                                                                                                                                           victims are
                                                         X are wholly different from those they agreed to in their home        the reporting period and provided them with a wide range of
                                                         countries. Individuals employed as domestic servants are              services, including full medical treatment and legal and job                 identified
                                                         particularly vulnerable to trafficking since they are not covered     assistance. Country X commonly fines and detains potential                 and provided
                                                         under the provisions of the labor law. Country X is also a            trafficking victims for unlawful acts committed as a direct result           adequate
                                                         destination for women who migrate and become involved in              of being trafficked, such as immigration violations and running             protection.
                                                         prostitution, but the extent to which these women are subjected       away from their sponsors, without determining whether the
                                                         to forced prostitution is unknown.         TVPA Minimum               individuals are victims of trafficking.
                                                                                                   Standard 4(11) –
                                                         The Government of Country X does     whether   the government
                                                                                                   not fully comply with       Country X sometimes offers temporary relief from deportation
                                                         the minimum standards for the shows         evidence
                                                                                             elimination         of overall
                                                                                                            of trafficking;    so that victims can testify as witnesses against their employers.
                                                         however, it is making significant effortsincreasing
                                                                                                      to do so.efforts.
                                                                                                                 Although      However, victims were generally not permitted to leave
                                                         the government has not yet enacted necessary anti-trafficking         the country if there is a pending case. The government
                                      Synopsis of        legislation, during the reporting period it reaffirmed its            did not routinely encourage victims to assist in trafficking
                                      government         commitment to this goal over the next year. Despite these             investigations or consistently offer victims alternatives to
                                        efforts.         efforts, the government did not show evidence of overall              removal to countries where they may face retribution or
                                                         progress in prosecuting and punishing trafficking offenders           hardship.
                                                         and identifying victims of trafficking; therefore, Country X
                                                         is placed on Tier 2 Watch List.
                                                                                                                               PRevention                                                        TVPA Minimum
                                                         Recommendations foR countRy X:                                        Country X made modest progress in preventing trafficking Standard 4(3) –
                                                         Enact the draft comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation;           in persons during the reporting period. In March, CountrywhetherX      the government
                                        Guidance                                                      TVPA Minimum
                                                         significantly increase efforts to investigate and prosecute           hosted a two-day regional workshop meant to establish dialog is making adequate efforts
                                       on how the                                                    Standards 1-3 –
                                                         trafficking offenses, and convict and punish trafficking              between scholars, government officials, and stakeholders; to to prevent human
                                      government                                                whether the government
                                                         offenders; institute and consistently apply formal procedures         discuss regional and international efforts to combat TIP; and        trafficking.
                                     can improve its                                              prohibits all forms of
                                                         to identify victims of trafficking among vulnerable groups, such      how to help victims. While the government made no apparent
                                      performance                                              trafficking and prescribes
                                                         as those arrested for immigration violations or prostitution;         effort to amend provisions of Country X‘s sponsorship law
                                       and obtain                                                   adequate criminal
                                                         and collect, disaggregate, analyze and disseminate counter-           – enacted in March 2009 – to help prevent the forced labor
                                       a better tier                                                   punishments.
                                                         trafficking law enforcement data.                                     of migrant workers, the government did start to enforce
                                         ranking.
                                                                                                                               other parts of the law to the benefit of migrant workers. One
                                                                                                                               provision in the sponsorship law continues to require foreign          Summary of the
                                                         PRosecution                                                           workers to request exit permits from their sponsors in order            government’s
                                                         The Government of Country X made minimal efforts to                   to leave Country X. Although this may increase migrant                     efforts to
                                                         investigate and prosecute trafficking offenses during the             workers’ vulnerability to forced labor, the law created a new          prevent human
                                                         reporting period. Country X does not prohibit all acts of             process through which a laborer who was not granted an exit               trafficking.
                                                         trafficking, but it criminalizes slavery under Section 321 and        permit due to a sponsor’s refusal or other circumstances can
                                                         forced labor under Section 322 of its criminal law. The prescribed    seek one by other means. The government has a national
                                                         penalty for forced labor – up to six months’ imprisonment – is        plan of action to address trafficking in persons, but did not
                                        Summary          not sufficiently stringent. Article 297 prohibits forced or coerced   publicly disseminate the plan or take steps to implement it
                                          of the         prostitution, and the prostitution of a child below age 15 even       during the reporting period. The government did not take any
                                      government’s       if there was no compulsion or redress; the prescribed penalty         public awareness campaigns aimed at reducing the demand
                                     legal structure     is up to 15 years’ imprisonment, which is commensurate with           for commercial sex acts in Country X, but the government
                                         and law         penalties prescribed for other serious crimes, such as rape.          undertook public awareness campaigns, but the government
                                      enforcement        Draft revisions to the penal code have not yet been enacted.          convicted two of its nationals for soliciting children for sex in
                                     efforts against     An unconfirmed report indicates that four traffickers were            other countries and sentenced them to 10 years’ imprisonment.
                                         human           charged with fraudulently issuing visas to workers who they
                                       trafficking.      then exploited. Two were reportedly deported, and two were
                                                         reportedly convicted. The government did not confirm nor
                                                         deny the existence of this case. The government did not report                                                                TVPA Minimum
                                                         any investigations, prosecutions, convictions, or sentences for                                                              Standard 4(12) –
                                                         trafficking complicity of public officials.                                                                              whether the government
                                                                                                                                    TVPA Minimum                              has made efforts to reduce the
                                                                                                                               Standard 4(7) – whether                       demand for commercial sex acts,
                                                TVPA Minimum                                                                  the government has made                         and, if applicable, participation
                                          Standard 4(1) – whether the                                                        adequate efforts to address                      in international sex tourism by
                                      government vigorously investigates                                                   the involvement in or facilitation                           its nationals.
                                      and prosecutes trafficking offenses                                                       of human trafficking by
                                     and convicts and punishes trafficking                                                     government employees.
      66                                offenders and provides data on
                                                 these actions.
